




HISTORY OF INDIAN 
AND 

EASTERN ARCHITECTURE 


JAMES FERGUSSON 

Volume II 


INDIAN ARCHITECTURE 
James Burgess 

EASTERN ARCHITECTURE 
R. Phene Spiers 





First Published 1919 


Rupa Publications India Pvt. Ltd. 
7/16, Ansari Road, Daryaganj, 
New Delhi 110 002 


Printed in India by 
Rekha Printers Pvt. Ltd. 

A- 102/1, Okhla Industrial Area, Phase-II, 
New Delhi-110 020 


Rupa Publications India Pvt. Ltd. 



CONTENTS. 


BOOK V. 

JAINA ARCHITECTURE. 


CIIAI'. PAC'.E 

1 . Introductory ... 3 

II. Jaina Caves— Orissa Caves— 
Badami and Aihole — DharA- 
sinva — Ankai— ElurA . , 9 

III. Jaina Structurai, Temple-s 
— Lakkundi — I’alilana — 
Girnar — Mount Abu — I’arab- 


CHAP. 

n&th — Ranpur — Gwdliar — 

PACE 


Khajuraho— Chitor 

23 

IV. 

Modern Jaina Style— Sona- 
garh — Jaina Temples at 
.Vhmadab&d — Delhi — Con- 



verted Temples 

62 

V. 

Jaina Style in Southern 



India — Deltas — Basils . 

70 


BOOK VI. 

NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE. 


I. Introductory — Dravidian 
and Indo-Aryan Temples at 
Paltadakal — Modern Tcmplo 
at Benares .... $4 

ll. Orissa — History — Tcmple.s at 
Bhuvanejwar, Kanarak, Purl, 
JAjpuri and Katak . 92 

III. Western India— Dharwar— 
Brahmanical Rock-cut 
Temples, at Elura, Badami, 
Eiephanta, Dhamnar.and Poona 117 


I IV. Central and Northern 
I India — Chandravatt and 

I Baroli — Kirtti • stambhas — 

Temples at GwAliar, Kha- 
juraho, Sinnar, Udayapur, 
Benares, Brind&ban, Kanta- 
nagar, Amritsar -132 

V. Civil Architecture— Ceno- 
taphs — Palaces at Gwaliar, 
Chitor, Amber, Dig— Ghats— 
Reservoirs— Dams . 164 



CONTENTS. 


BOOK VII. 

INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. 


I. Introductory . . iS6 

II. GhaznI— T omb of Mahmfid 
— Gates of Somnftth — Min&rs 
on the Plain . *191 

III. PathAn Style— Mosque at 

Old Delhi — Qutb Minir — 
Tomb of ’ Alftu-d-Dtn — Pathiln 
Tombs — Ornamentation of 
Pathin Tombs 196 

IV. Jaunpur— J ftmi’ Masjid.and 

Lil DarwUza . 222 

V. GdjarAt— Jftmi’ Masjid and 
other Mosques at Ahmadibftd 
— Tombs and Mosques at 
Sarkhej and Batwft— Buildings 
in the Provinces . . 229 

VI. MAlwa— Dhar— The Great 
Mosque at Mandd — The 
Palaces .... 246 
VII. Bengal — Bengali roofing — 
Qadam-i-Rasfil Mosque, Gaur 
— Sonft, Adtmb and EUikht 
Mosques, hf Aldfi — Minfir— 
Gateways .... 253 


CHAP. PAGE 

VIII. Kulbarga— The Mosque at 
Kulbaiga— Madrasa at Btdar 
—Tombs • .262 

IX. BijApCr— The J^mi’ Masjid 
—Tombs of Ibrihim and 
Mahmfid — The Audience Hall 
— Mihtari Mahall — Golkonda 
Tombs — Tomb of Nawlb 
Amtr Khin, near Tatta . 268 

X. Mughal Architecture— 
Dynasties — ^Tomb of Muham- 
mad Ghaus, Gwfiliar- Mosque 
at Fathpur - Stkrt — Akbar’s 
Tomb, Sikandara— Palace at 
Delhi— The Tfij Mahall— Tlie 
Mot! Masjid — Mosque at Delhi 
— The Martini^re, Begam 
Kothf, and Imfimbftra at Luck- 
now— English Tombs at Surat 
— Tomb at Junfigadh . . 283 

XL Wooden Architecture— 
Mosque of Shfih Hamadin, 
5 rinagar ^ . *333 


HISTORY OF EASTERN ARCHITECTURE. 

BOOK VIII. 


FURTHER INDIA. 


I. Burma — Introductory— Types 
of Religious Buildings — 
Circular Pagodas — Square 
Temples, etc. Ruins of 
Thatdn, Prome, and Pagin — 
Monasteries .... 339 

II. Cambodia — Introductory — 

The various classes of temple 
and their disposition— Temples 
of Angkor Vfit, Angkor Thom, 

Beng M6aleft, Ta Prohm, 
Banteai Kedei, Prah-khan, 


etc.— Palaces and Civil Archi- 
tecture 371 

III. Siam — S tructures in the temple 

enclosures— Temples at Su- 
khodaya, Phra Pathom, Sajjan* 
filaya, Ayuthifi, Lophaburi, 
Sa^kalok and Bangkok — 

Hall of Audience at Bangkok 404 

IV, Java— History— Boro-Budur— 

Temples at Mendut— On the 
Dieng Plateau — At Jabang — 
Pramb&nan — Suku — Near 
Melang, and at Panataran 414 



CONTENTS. 


BOOK IX. 

CHINA AND JAPAN. 


CHAP. PAGE 

I. Introductory *446 

II. China — The origin and de- 
velopment of the Chinese 
temple and other structures — 
Materials employed in their 
buildings <451 

III. Temple of the Great Dragon— 
Huddhist Temples- Tombs— 

IXDt.X 


CHAP PACK 

Pagodas— P‘ai-lus— Domestic 
Architecture .... 459 
IV. Japan— Chronology — Original 

Sources, etc 486 

V. Japanese Temples— At Hor 
iuji, Nara, and Nikk6 — 
Pagodas— Palaces— Domestic 
Architecture .... 492 

■ 503 




History of Indian 

and 

Eastern Architecture 




BOOK V. 

JAINA ARCHITECTURE. 


CHAPTER I. 

INTRODUCTORY. 

The Jaina sect sprang up almost contemporaneously with the 
Buddhist: Vardham&na, their last apostle, was a native of 
Vaix&It, in Tirhfit, a contemporary of 5Skyamuni Buddha 
and died at F&w& in Bihdr, during the lifetime of the latter.* 
They are in two divisions — the Digambaras, that is, those 
“ whose covering is the air,” who regard nudity as a sign of 
holiness, though they are now obliged to part from the outdoor 
practice of their theory ; and the Swetclmbaras, who are “ clad 
in white.” The Jaina religious theories and practices, in many 
respects, closely resemble those of the Buddhists. They acknow- 
ledge no supreme governor, believe in transmigration, regard 
all animal life as sacred, reverence the Jinas or Ttrthankaras, 
because they believe them to have overcome all human desires, 
and to have attained Nirv&na; but they have no veneration for 
relics. They consist of ecclesiastics — Yatis or S&dhus — and 
lay hearers or 5rSvaks. The laity are chiefly engaged in 
trade and banking.* Jains are numerous in the larger towns 
all over India, but especially in R&jput&na, Gujar&t, and 
neighbouring provinces, and also in Kanara and Mysore, 
where they are mostly Digambaras. 

^ vol. i. p. 130. the Jainas,' English translation (lMdon» 

* For a sketch of their history and 190^); and for their ritual, * Indian 
doctrines, see BUhler’s 'Indian Sect of Antiquary,’ vol. xiii. pp. ipifig. 



4 JAINA ARCHITECTURE. BookV. 

Altogether the Jains form a small section of the population 
of India, according to the last census, numbering about 1,334,000 
or scarcely i in 221 of the whole population.* They are by far 
more numerous in western India and R&jputina than elsewhere ; 
thus in Rijput&na there are 111,600 of the Digambara division, 
and fully twice as many Svetimbaras ; whereas in Mysore where 
the Digambaras outnumber the others by 6 to i, they only count 
11,700, and, whilst numerically fewer, they are equally less 
influential than their co-religionists farther north.* 

The proper objects of worship are the twenty-four Jinas or 
Ttrthankaras, but, like the Buddhists, they allow the existence 
of Hindu gods, and have admitted into their sculptures at least 
such of them as are connected with the tales of their saints — 
among which are Indra or 5 akra, Garuda, Sarasvatt, Lakshml, 
Asuras, Nigas, Rikshasas, Gandharvas, Apsarasas, etc., forming 
a pantheon of their own, divided into four classes — Bhavan- 
idhipatis, Vyantaras, Jyotishkas, and Vaim&nikas.* 

The llrthankaras are each recc^nisable by a cognizance or 
chihna, usually placed below the image ; and they are sometimes 
represented as of different colours or complexions: thus the 
first five are of yellow or golden colour, as are also the 7th, loth 
and I ith, 13th to 1 8th, 21st and 24th ; the 6th and 12th are red ; 
the 8th and 9th, white or fair ; the 19th and 23rd are blue ; and 
the 2Qth and 22nd, black. Each has his own sacred tree, and 
is attended by a male and female Yaksha or spirit, usually 
represented on the right and left ends of the dsana or throne of 
the image, whilst a third attendant is carved on the centre of 
it The Ttrthankaras with their distinctive signs, etc, are given 
in the following table : — 


* The following statement, from the census returns of 1901, will indicate tlie 


distribution of the Juins : — 

In Bombay Fresiden^, Barodfi and smaller states . 

R&jputftna including Ajmtr ..... 362,517 

Panj&b . . . . . . 50,020 

United Provinces and Ondh ..... 84,582 

Central India . ...... 112,998 

Central Provinces and Ber&r ..... 67,822 

Haidarftbftd ....... 20,345 

Mysore and Cooig ...... I3t7<^ 

Madras ^sidency ...... 27,437 

Bengal, Asftm, Kashmir, etc. .... 10,478 


Total Jaina population .... 1,334,148 


* The Digambaras seem to have migrated to the south, owing to a severe famine 
in Hindustan, somewhere about 50 B.c. perhaps upder the leadership of the later 
Bhadrabdhu.-^* Indian Antiquary,’^ vol. xx. pp. 3^; and xxi. pp. I59£ 

* Appendix to Btthler’s * Inman Sect of the Jainas,’ English translation, pp. 61 

it Siff, 



Chap. I. 


INTRODUCTORY. 


5 


No. 

Namk. 

Distinctive Sign. 

Born. 

Died. 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

>3 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

1 

Adi-n&tha or Rishabha . 
Ajita-n&tha 

Sambhava 

Abhinandana . 
Sumati-n&tha . 
Padtnaprabha . 
Sup&rxva-ndtha 
Chandraprabha 
Pushpadanta 

5!tala-nitha 

5reydnua-ndtha 

V&sapCljya 

Vimala-nitha . 
Ananta-ndtha . 
Dharma-nitha . 
^dnti-ndtha 

Kunthu-ndtha . 

Ara-ndtha 

Malli-ndtha 

Munisuvrata 

Nami-ndtha 

Nemi-ndtha 

Pdr.rwa-ndtha . 

Mahdvira, or Vardhamdna 

Bull . . . 

Elephant 

Horse . 

Ape 

Curlew . 

Lotus . 

Swastika mark 
Crescent-moon . 
Crocodile 
^rlvatsa mark 
Rhinoceros . 
Buffalo . 

Boar . 

Falcon . 

Thunderbolt 

Antelope 

Goat 

Nandydvarta mark 
Water-jar . 
Tortoise 

Blue water-lily 
Conch shell . 
Serpent 

Lion . 

Vinitanagari . 
Ayodhyd . 
5rdvasti . 
Ayodhyd . 

Kat^mbl 
Benares . 
Chandrapura . 
Kdnandtnagari 
Bhadrapura 
Simhapura 
Champdpuri . 
Kampilyapura 
Ayodhyd . 
Ratnapurl 

1 Gajapura 

jHastinapura . 
Mathurd . 
Rdjagriha 
Mathurd . 
Sauripura 
Benares . 
Kundagrdma . 

Ashtdpada . 
Samet 5tkhar 

»» 

n 

»» 

V 

>» 

>» 

Champdpurt 
Samet, 5ikhar 

)f 

t) 

It 

It 

It 

It 

It 

Mt Girndr . 
Samet 5ikhar 
Pdwdpuri . 


Among these the most frequently represented are the first, 
sixteenth, and last three. 

There are few of the problems connected with this branch 
of our subject so obscure and so puzzling as those connected 
with the early history of the architecture of the Jains. This 
style, always singularly chaste and elegant, was essentially 
Hindd, and was doubtless largely common to all Hindfi sects 
in western India, but in its evolution it became modified by 
Jaina taste and requirements. And, the Br&hmans in turn, 
through the influence of the workmen, gradually accepted most 
of the stylistic improvements of their rivals. This seems to 
have been more especially the case in Gujar&t and Rftjput&na, 
where the Jains were very numerous and influential, and we 
might almost with equal propriety designate their style of 
architecture as a Western Hindfl style; but this would lead 
to the inclusion of examples of greater diversity, and interfere 
with clearness of treatment. When we first practically meet 
with it in the early part of the iith century at Abd, or at 
Girnflr, it is a style complete and perfect in all its parts, 
evidently the result of long expn-ience and continuous artistic 







6 JAINA ARCHITECTURE. Book V. 

development. From that point it progresses during one or 
two centuries towards greater richness, but in doing so loses 
the purity and perfection it had attained at the earlier period, 
and from that culminating point its downward progress can 
be traced through abundant examples to the present day. 

When, however, we try to trace its upward progress the case 
is widely different. General Cunningham found some Jaina 
statues at MathurA belonging to the period of the Kushan 
kings, and excavations there in 1887 and following seasons, 
brought to light portions of a carved rail, statues, and numerous 
other sculptures, belonging to a stdpa, and two or more ancient 
temples there; but among them were images belonging to 
so late a date as the nth century.^ Before this last period, we 
have only fragments of temples of uncertain origin and date, and 
all in so very ruined a condition that they hardly assist us in 
our researches. Yet the Jains during the whole of this interval 
were a flourishing community, and had their temples as well 
as their rock-cut sanctuaries, such as we see at Khandagiri in 
Orissa, at Jun^gadh, Elflr^, Ankai, Aihole, and elsewhere. 

Meanwhile one thing seems tolerably clear, that the religion 
of the Buddhists and that of the Jains were so similar to one 
another, both in their origin and their development and 
doctrines, that their architecture must also at first have been 
nearly the same. In consequence of this; if we could trace 
back Jaina art from about the year 1000, when practically 
we first meet it, to the year 600 or 700, when we lose sight 
of Buddhist art, we should probably find the two very much 
alike. Or if, on the other hand, we could trace Buddhist 
art from A.D. 600 to A.D. 1000, we should as probably find it 
developing itself into something like the temples on Mount 
Ab(i, and elsewhere, at that period of time. 

A strong presumption that the architecture of the two 
sects was similar arises from the fact of their principal sculptures 
being so nearly identical tluit it is not always easy for the 
casual observer to distinguish what belongs to the one and 
what to the other; and it requires some experience to do 
this readily. The Ttrthankaras are generally represented seated 
in the same cross-legged attitude as Buddha, with the same 
curly hair, and the same stolid contemplative expression of 
countenance. Where, however, the emblems that accompany 
the Jaina saints can be recognised, this difficulty does not 
exist Another test arises from the fact that the Digambara 


‘ * Archseol'jgical Reports,' vol. L pp. vol. xvii. pp. 107-z i2.aiKl plates 30 and 31 ; 
231-S44, plates 39 and 40; vol. tii. pp. 31 vol. xx. pp. 30-39, and plates 2-5 ; V. 
it plates 13 and 15 ; vol. xi. p. 75 ; Smith, ^The Jain Stilfxi, eic.. of Matliur^.’ 



Chap. I. 


INTRODUCTORY. 


7 


Jaina saints are represented as naked which, in ancient times, 
was perhaps the orthodox sect, though the 5wet&mbaras are 
clothed much like the Buddhists. Whra, therefore, a figure of 
the class is represented as naked it may certainly be assumed 
to belong to the Digambara sect ; the 5 wetftmbara images have 
a loin*cloth ; these and other traits, as the attendant Yakshas 
and Yakshinfs carved on the thrones, and the position of the 
hands, enable us to distinguish between Buddhist and Jaina 
bas-reliefs and sculptures. Probably all the earlier Jaina caves 
were excavated for Digambara Jains.* 

It is now quite apparent that, in consequence of our know- 
ledge of Buddhist architecture being derived almost exclusively 
from rock-cut examples, we miss a great deal which, if derived 
from structural buildings, would probably solve this question 
of early similarity among other problems that perplex us. 

The same remarks apply equally to the Jaina caves. Those 
at Udayagiri, Jun&^dh, B&dilmi, £lur&, and Ankai, do not help 
us in our investigation, because thqy are not copies of structural 
buildings, but are rock-cut examples, which had grown up into 
a style of their own, distinct from that of structural edifices. 

The earliest hint we get of a twelve-pillared dome, such 
as those universally used by the Jains, is in a sepulchre at 
Mylassa in Caria,* probably belonging to the 4th century. A 
second hint is found in the great cave at B&gh (Woodcut 
No. 113) in the 6th or 7th century, and there is little doubt that 
others will be found when looked for — but where ? In the valley 
of the Ganges, and wherever the Muhammadans settled in 
force, it would be in vain to look for them. These zealots 
found the slender and elegant pillars, and the richly carved 
horizontal domes of the Jains, so appropriate and so easily 
re-arranged for their purposes, that they utilised all they 
cared not to destroy. The great mosques of Ajmlr, Delhi, 
Kanauj, Dh&r, and Ahmad&b&d, are merely reconstructed 
temples of the Hindfis and Jains. There is, however, nothing 
in any of them that seems to belong to a very remote period 
— nothing in fact that can be carried back to times long, if at all, 
anterior to the year locx). So we must look further for the 
cause of their loss. 

As mentioned in the introduction the curtain drops on the 

' In Jaina images the hands are always Digamhans, Sup&rrva— the seventh Jina 
laid in the lap, the clothing is scanty even —has a smaller group of hoods over his 
on 5 wet&mbara images, and the thrones head. The ^wet&mbaras also decorate 
and attendants differ, whilst the Jinu or their images with crowns and ornaments ; 
Arhats only have c<f nisances, and the the other sect do not. 

.SVlvatsa figure on the breast. The Arores * * Ancient and Medieval Archi tecture,* 

of Pdrjwanith are distinguishea by vol. i. p. 371, Woodcut No. 242. 
snake-hoods over them ) and with the 



8 JAINA ARCHITECTURE. Book V. 

drama of Indian history about the year 650, or a little later, 
and for tihree centuries we have only the faintest glimmerings 
of what took place within her boundaries. Civil wars seem 
to have raged everywhere, and religious persecution may have 
prevailed. When the curtain again rises we have an entirely 
new scene and new dramatis personcB presented to us. Buddhism 
had disappeared, except in a corner of Bengal, and Jainism had 
continued in influence throughout the west, and Vaishnavism 
had usurped its inheritance in the east. It was most probably 
during these three centuries of misrule that the structural temples 
and vih8ras of the Buddhists disappeared, and the earlier 
temples of the Jains ; and there is a gap consequently in 
our history which may be fllled up by new discoveries in remote 
places,^ but which at present separates this chapter from the 
account of Buddhist Architecture in Book 1. in a manner it is 
not pleasant to contemplate. 

^ The antiauities of Java will probably, to some extent at least, supply this defi* 
ciency, as will be pointed out in the account of the architecture of the island. 



264. Yavana guard at Rftni-ka-naur Cave, 
Udayagiri. 



CHAPTER 11 . 
JAINA CAVES. 


COKTENTS. 

Orissa Caves — B&dimi and Aihole — Db&r&sinv& — ^Ankai — Eldr&. 


The Jains, like the other sects, excavated cave-dwellings or 
bhikshugrihas for their recluses ; but the nature of their religion 
did not require large assembly halls like the chait}^as of the 
Buddhists. They naturally followed the fashion of the other 
contemporary sects,. to which indeed all India was accustomed. 
We find them, consequently, excavating caves in Orissa and at 
JunAgadh or Girn^r in Gujarat, as early as the 2nd century B.C., 
and at later dates at B&ddmi, at Pdtna in Khandesh, at ElCir^, 
Ankai, and elsewhere.' And before entering upon the character- 
istic examples of the later Jaina Architecture, it may be as well, 
at this stage, to give some account of the cave architecture of 
the sect. 


Orissa Caves. 

The Orissa caves have already been referred to, as they were 
long mistaken as a group of Buddhist excavations.^ They are 
probably as old as anything of the kind in India and, unless 
some of the BihSr excavations were Jaina, they are the earliest 
caves of the sect. The oldest and most numerous are in the hill 
on the east called Udayagiri ; the more modern in the western 
portion designated Khandagiri. The picturesqueness of their 
forms, the character of their sculptures and architectural details, 
combined with their great antiquity, render them one of the 
most important groups of caves in India, and one that is most 
deserving of a careful scientific survey. The accompanying 
plan (Woodcut No. 265) will help the reader to understand 
their arrangement. 

What we know of the age of the older caves here is principally 
derived from a long inscription on the front of one of the oldest, 


^ Buddhist and Jaina caves are known all over India as Umu, 
* Ant$^ vol. i. p. 177 * 




Udayagiri and Khandagiri Caves in Orissa.^ Scale 150 ft. to x in. 




Chap. II. 


ORISSA CAVES. 


ti 


fullest translation of it,^ we learn that a king Kh&ravela of Kalinga 
constructed rock-dwellings and bestowed abundant gifts on Jaina 
devotees, and that he assisted the Andhra king .Sfttakami ; also 
that the thirteenth year of his reign coincided with the 165th 
of the Maurya Era, that is, about 155 B.C.* Palaeographically 
also, the forms of the letters used in this and some other 
inscriptions here are almost identical with those used by Aioka 
in the copy of his edicts on the Dhauli rock close by, and in 
that found at Jaugada, near the southern comer of the Chilkya 
lake. The first presumption, therefore, is that they may be 
within a century of the same date, which is supported by this 
inscription. 

The inscription, as well as another in the Svargapfiri or 
Vaikuntha cave, also commences with a distinctively Jaina 
formula — a very important point that had previously been 
overlooked. This supports the conclusion stated above as to 
the origin of these caves.* 

This Hitht-gumph& cave, probably the oldest here, looks as 
if it might have been a great natural cavern, the brow of which 
had been smoothed to admit of the inscription. There are 
indications, however, that it had at least t^n improved by 
art ; but the rock is of loose and friable texture, and the present 
state of the cave is largely due to decay ; besides, so important 
a record would hardly placed over an excavation of no 
consideration. 

The whole style of the architecture and sculpture in the 
older caves here points to a period quite as early as that 
of the S&nchi gateways and the small vih&ra at Bh&jA, and 
we cannot be far wrong in ascribing most of them at least 
to the 2nd century before our era. Nor is any trace of 
Buddhism found among them: the figures of Gaja Lakshmt 
or Srt, of snakes, sacred trees, the Svastika and other symbols 
are all as much Jaina as Buddhist, and in several of the caves 

' Tliis inscription first attracted the quite a new point in Indian Chronoloejr. 
attention of Stirling, and a plate, repre- — '^grapbia Indica,’ vol. >>• pp. W, 8^ 
senting it very imperfectly, is given in the * Even as late as 1880, Baon Rijen- 
15th volume of the ‘Asiatic Researches.’ dralfll Mitta, who h^_ the most ansple 
It was afterwards copied 1 ^ Kittoe, and a opportunities of examining every detail of 
translation, as far as its imperfection the Orissa caves, had no suspicion of their 
admitted, made by Prinsep (‘Journal of being of other than Buddhist orij^; and 
the Asiatic Society of Bengal,’ vol. vi. bis reading of the Hfttht-gnmpbt inserip- 
pp. loSoff.) In im Pandit Bhagwdnl&l tion — like the whole of his work— Is 
Indr&ji, Ph. D. , made a careful copy of it on simply worthless. — ‘Antiquities of Orissa,' 
thespot,andMr. LockeiniSyi-iSyatook voL ii. pp. lyfT. 

a plaster cast of it; from these the Pandit * Iliuen Tsiang, in the 7th century 
studied the record arresh,andpublished his stated that Kalinga was then one of the 
version in the ‘ Actes du sixieme Congriis chief seats of the Jains. — Beal, ‘ Buddhist 
internat.desOrientalistes’ (Leiden, 1884), Records,’ vol. ii. p. 208. 
vol. iii. pt. a, pp. 135-149. This gave 



13 


JAINA ARCHITECTURE. 


Book V. 


-Hiot perhaps the earliest — are found figures of the Jaina 
Ttrthankaras and their attendants.^ 

Close to the H&tht-gumph& is a small cave, known as Sarpa, 
the whole fronton of which over the doorway is occupied 
by a great three-headed NAga, and may be as old as the HAtht 
cave. The inscription on it merely says that it is “the un- 
equalled chamber of Chfilakama,” who seems also to have exca- 
vated another cave here, to the west of the HAtht-gumphA, called 
HaridAsa * — a long room with three doorways behind a verandah. 

Besides these, and smaller caves to be noticed hereafter, 
the great interest of the Udayagiri caves centres in two — the so- 
callra Ganera cave, and that called the RAj RAnt, RAnt-kA-naur, 
or RAnt HansapAra, or simply RAnt-gumphA, from a baseless 
HindA tradition that it was excavated by the RAnt of LalA- 
tendra Kemrt, the reputed builder of the Bhuvanefwar temple 
in the yth centuiy. 

The former is a small cave, consisting of two cells, together 
30 ft. long by 10 ft. wide, in front of which is a verandah, 
slightly loi^r, that was once adorned with 
five pillars, though only three are now stand- 
ing (Woodcut No. 266).* There is an inscrip- 
tion on the back wall of this cave in 
a66. GanemC^^ (From mediaeval characters, dedicating it to Jagan- 
|H«i to Mr. Locke.) nAth ; but this is evidently an addition, pro- 
^ Scale 50 ft. to 1 in, ba^ly gyt when the image of Ganera was also 
inserted.* The style of the au*chitecture may be judged of 
from the annexed woodcut, representing one of its pillars 
(Woodcut No. 267). They are of extreme simplicity, being 
square piers, changing into octagons in the centre only, and 
with a slight bracket of very wooden construction on each 
face. The four doorways leading into the cells are adorned 
with the usual horseshoe - formed canopies copied from the 



’ K it to be regretted that when the 
Ben^ Government twice sent sorvey 
parties to Orissa, and spent to much on 
the publication of their work, no adequate 
directions were given as to what should 
be obstped and illustiated. 

* This was called Pawan-gumpht by 
Ptiq^ — probably by mistake. The 
names attached to the different caves, 
however, are much confuted in the 
diSinent accounts : that called Vaikuntha- 
ri by Kittoe and R. Mitra seems to 
now called Svaigapllri ; the Alak&pilri, 
a doable-storeyed cave, is apparently 
the Svergapdri of RiiendtaUl Mitra, 
who miaes up the AlakSpftri and Chhota 
Httht-gumphi; the Jodev cave of Kittoe 


has been called Jayavijaya; the names 
of Pitftlapllri and ManchapAri have 
been interchanged by RAjendraUll ; and 
so on, — ^making it almost impossible to 
reconcile the various accounts. — ‘ Official 
Report to Bengal Government, by BAbu 
Manmoban Chakravarti,’ August 1902, 

* A recent attempt has been made on 
the part of Government to “restore” 
these caves. This was ill-advised, and 
the restored elephants at the entrance 
steps here do not conform to the orMnal 
figures, whilst the new pillars do uttle 
credit to the Executive. 

* 'Journal of the Asiatic Sociefy of 
Bengal,’ vol. vi. p. 1075. 




Chap. II. 


ORISSA CAVES. 


*3 


fronts of the chait}^ halls, and which we are' now so familiar 
with from the Bharaut sculptures, and from the openings 
common to all wooden buildings 
of that age. The compartments 
between the doors of the cells 
contain figure sculptures — one of 
them seemingly almost a replica of 
a scene on the frieze of the upper 
storey of the Rftn!-gumphA The 
centre panel is occupied by a roof 
carved in low relief with three 
pinnacles, and a rail-pattern frieze 
over it 

The other cave is very much 
larger, being two storeys in height, 
both of which were originally 
adorned by verandahs: the upper 
63 ft. long, opening into four cells, 
the lower 43 ft., opening into three 
(Woodcuts No. 268 and 269). All 
the doors leading into these cells 
have jambs sloping slightly inwards, 

which is itself a sufficient indication - „ , 

that the cave is long anterior to the rsketTby ?he AuStor) 

Christian Era. Of the nine pillars 

of the upper verandah only two remain standing, and these much 




a68. Up^ storey, R&nl-gumpbA. 260. Lower storey, Rint-gumphS. 

&ale 50 ft. to X in. (From Plans by H. H. L^cke.) 

mutilated, while all the six of the lower storey have perished.* It 
seems as if from inexperience the excavators had not left sufficient 

^ The pillars in both storeys were as shoddy work of the most gim-crack 
restored a few years ago by slender description.”— * Report to Government of 
shafts, described oy the Collector of Puri Bengal,* i6th May 1902^ 




14 JAINA ARCHITECTURE. Book V. 

substance to support the mass of rock above, and probably in 
consequence of some accident, the mass above fell in, bearing 
ever3rthing before it. Either then, or at some subsequent period, 
an attempt has been made to restore the lower verandah in 
wood, and for this purpose a chase has been cut through the 

sculptures that adorned its back 
wall, and they have been other- 
wise so mutilated that it is almost 
impossible to make out their 
meaning. The accompanying 
section (No. 270) will illustrate 
the position of this wooden 
adjunct and that of the two 

970. Section of RAai-gumphft. storeys of this cave. Fortu- 

Scaie 35 ft. to I in. nately, the sculptures of the 

upper verandah are tolerably 
entire, though in some parts they, too, have been very badly 
treated. 

Besides this, which may be called the main body of the 
building, two wings project forward ; that on the left 40 ft., 
that on the right 20 it ; and, as these contained, cells on both 
storeys, the whole afforded accommodation for a considerable 
numwr of inmates. 

' The great interest of these two caves, however, lies in their 
sculptures. In the Ganera cave, as already mentioned, there 
are two bas-reliefs. The first represents a man asleep under 
a tree, and a woman watching over him. To them a woman 
is approaching, leading a man by the hand, as if to introduce 
him to the sleeper. Beyond them a man and a woman are 
fighting with swords and shields in very close combat, and 
behind them a man i.« carrying off a female in his arms.^ 

The second bas-relief comprises fifteen figures and two 
elephants. There may be in it two successive scenes, though 
my impression is, that only one is intended, while I feel certain 
this is the case regarding the first. In the R&nt cave the 
second bas-relief is identical, in all essential respects, with 
the first in the Ganera, but the reliefs that precede and follow 
it represent different scenes altogether. It is, perhaps, in vain 
to speculate what episode this rape scene represents, probably 
some tradition not yet identified ; its greatest interest for our 

j There is a veijr faithful drawing of and photographs, some of which were 
this bas-relief by Kittoe in the * Journal published on plate loo of *Trce and 
of the Asiatic Society of Bengal,’ vol. Serpent Worship/ 2nd ed., 1873; ’Cave 
▼iL plate 44. But casts of all these Temples/ plate 1 ; and in Kdjendralill 
sculptures were taken in 1871-1872 by Mitra’s ’Antiquities of Orissa/ vol. ii. 
Ifr. Zx)cke, of the School of Art, Calcutta, plates 6-14. 





Chap. II. 


ORISSA CAVES. 


*5 


present purposes is that the first named is singularly classical 
in design and execution, the latter wilder, and both in action 
and costume far more purely Indian. Before the discovery 
of the Bharaut sculptures, it is hardly doubtful that we would 
have pronounced those in the Ganera cave the oldest, as being 
the most perfect. The Bharaut sculptures, however, having 
shown us how perfect the native art was at a very early date, 
have considerably modified our opinions on this subject ; and 
those in the R&nt cave, being so essentially Indian in their 
style, now appear to me the oldest Those in the Ganera- 
gumphi, as more classical, may have been executed at a 
subsequent date, but still both long anterior to the Christian 
Era. The other bas-reliefs in the R&j-R&nt cave represent 
scenes of hunting, fighting, dancing, drinking, and love-making 
— anything, in fact, but religion or praying in any shape or form. 

From the sculptures at S&nchi and Bharaut, we were 
prepared to expect that we should not find any direct evidence 
of Mah&y&na Buddhism in sculptures anterior to the Chnstian 
Era : but those at this place are not Buddhist but Jaina, and 
till we are better acquainted with the Jaina legends than we 
are at present, we cannot hope to determine what such sculptures 
really represent. Besides these bassi-rilievi, there is in the R&nt 
cave a ngure, in high relief, of a female (?) riding on a lion. 
Behind him or her, a soldier in a kilt, or rather the dress of a 
Roman soldier, with laced boots reaching to the calf of the leg 
(Woodcut No. 264) — very similar, in fact, to those represented 
on plate 28, fig. i, of ‘Tree and Serpent Worship,’ as strangers 
paying their addresses to a threerstoreyed stfipa — and behind 
this, again, a female of foreigpi a.spect. 

In another cave of the same group — the Jayavijaya, called by 
Kittoe the Jodev-Garbha — and of alwut the same age, between 
the two doorways leading to the cells, a sacred tree is being 
worshipped by two men and two women with offerings. It is 
surrounded by the usual rail, and devotees and others are 
bringing offerings.^ The verandah has a male figure outside at 
the left end, and a female at the right. 

In yet another cave, in' the Khandagiri hill, similar in plan 
to the Ganera cave, and probably older than either of ' the two 
last-mentioned, called Ananta-garbha, are bassi-rilievi over the 
doorways ; one — on the right — is devoted, like the last, to Tree 
worship, the other to the honour of 5rt {pide ante, vol. i. p. 50). She 
is standing on her lotus, and two elephants, standing likewise on 
lotuses, are pouring water over her.’ The same represeptation 
occurs once, at least, at Bharaut, and ten times at Sfhichi, and, 

* ‘Journal of the Asiatic Society of * ‘Tree and Serpent Worship,’ plate 
Bengal,’ vol. vii. plate 42. too, p. 105 ; ‘Cave Tmpl^^late I. 


i6 JAINA ARCHITECTURE. Book V. 

so far as I know, is the earliest instance of honour paid to god or 
man in Indian sculptures. The third to the left is partly woken 
away by the fall of the wall between the next two doors ; but 
enough is left to show that it represented SArya, the sun-god, in 
his chariot drawn by four horses, with his two wives, much as in 
the small early vihAra at Bh&jA ; ^ and the fourth had been filled 
by a lai^e elephant facing outwards, with one on each side 
holding up flowers. The arches over these sculptures and the 
frieze connecting them are also carved with figures in quaint 
positions or flying, and each arch i.<t covered by two triple- 
headed serpents whose hoods are raised at the sides of the 
arches. 

The pilasters by the sides of the doorways are of a curious, 
if not exceptional class, and more like some of those found 
in early caves in the West than any others on 
this side of India (Woodcut No 271). They are 
evidently copied from some form of wooden 
posts stuck into stone bases, as is usual at 
KirlA, NAsik, and other Western caves. Here, 
however, the surface is carved to an extent not 
found elsewhere, and betrays a wooden origin 
indicative of the early age to which the excava- 
tion of this cave must be assigned. The animal 
figures on the capitals and on other caves here 
is also a feature generally marking an early date. 


971. Pflasterfirom 
Anaoto-guinpbt. 379, Tiger Cave, Uda3ragiri. 

as is also the inward slope of the door jambs. The pillars of 
the verandah are gone, and a new support has been inserted 
by the Public Works engineers. 



1 A ^etch of this sculpture was pub- 
lished in Fergusson’s 'Archaeology in 
India’ (18^), p. 34 - The small ligure 


ki front of the chariot with a jar is 
perhaps meant for Rfthu carrying off the 
Amrita. 


Chap. II. 


ORISSA CAVES. 


*7 


One other cave here — ^the Bigh-gumphi — deserves to be 
mentioned. It is a great boulder, carved into the semblance of 
a tiger’s head, with his jaws open, and his throat, as it should 
be, is a doorway leading to a single cell about 6 ft. 4 in. deep, 
by 7 to 9 ft. wide (Woodcut No. 272). It is a caprice, but one 
that shows that those who conceived it had some experience in 
the plastic arts before they undertook it The door jambs slope 
inwards slightly, and the pilasters on each side have winged 
elephants on the capitals and vase-shaped bases. From the 
form of the characters also which are engraved upon it, it is 
undoubtedly anterior to the Christian Era, but how much earlier 
it is difficult to say. 

A little lower down the Khandagiri hill than the Ananta are 



273 Representation of a Hall from Bharaut sculptures. 

two caves called T&tv^-gumpha, the upper consisting of one room 
i6i ft. to 18 ft. long by if ft. deep and 5 ft. 9 in. high, having 
three entrances.^ The doors are flanked by pilasters with 

^ Cunningham’s ‘Archaeological Survey Reports,’ vol. xiii. (by Mr. Beglar), pp. 8if. 
Like several others, it is not mentioned in Rijendralil Mitra’s ‘ Antiquities of Orissa. ’ 




i8 JAINA ARCHITECTURE. BookV. 

capitals of the Persepolitan type, and the facade over these is 
sculptured as a long ridged roof with pointed spikes, comparable 
with representations found at Bharaut (Woodcut No. 273). 
Under this is a frieze of five-barred railing with elephants carved 
at each end, and the tympana are flanked by birds, a peacock, 
and a hare, and within are filled with carved ornaments. But it 
is of special interest that the walls have once been covered with 
a coating of fine plaster. On the middle of the back wall are 
sculptures of the sun and moon, on each side of which a long 
inscription once extended— of which remains still exist — written 
on the plaster with. a red pigment.^ 

Space forbids more detail of these interesting caves, and 
until we have a scientific survey of the whole — inclusive of 
many that only await clearing of the earth in which they are 
buried— made in the full light of all the knowledge we now 
possess, it is impossible to do them justice from archaeological 
and historical aspects. 

Great light was thrown on the history of Jaina excavations 
by the discovery of a Jaina cave at Bfldimi, 64 miles south 
of Btj&pur, with a fairly ascertained date.^ There is no inscrip- 
tion on the cave itself, but there are three other Brahmanical 
caves in the same place, one of which has an inscription 
with an undoubted date, 5 aka 500 or A.D. 579; and all four 
caves are so like one another in style that they must have 
been excavated within the same centuiy. The Jaina cave is 
probably the most modem ; but if we take the year A.D. 650 
as a medium date, we may probably consider it as certain 
within an error of twenty years either way. 

The cave itself is small, only 31 ft. across and about 16 ft. 
deep, and it is hardly doubtful that the groups of figures at 
either end of the verandah are integral. The inner groups, 
however, are certainly of the age of the cave, and the archi- 
tecture is unalter^, and thus becomes a fixed standing-point 
for comparison with other examples; and when we come to 
compare it with the groups known as the Indra Sabhi and 
Jagann&th Sabb& at £lih‘&, we cannot hesitate to ascribe them 
to more than a century later. 

With these we may here mention that at Aihole, besides a 
Brahmanical cave, there is also a Jaina one of somewhat larger 
dimensions than that at B 4 d&mi. The verandah has four pillars 
in front, is 3a ft. in length and 7 ft 3 in. wide, and has a care- 
fully carved roof. The hall is 17 ft. 8 in. wide by 15 ft deep. 


^ No satis&ctoiy tracing of this has 
been made; and the verandah of the 
cave has now been supported by two 
piers of Public Works construction. 


* Burgess, * Archeological Survey of 
Western India’, vol. i. (1875), P* ^ 5 » 
plates 36 and 37. 



Chap. II. ELURA JAINA CAVES. 19 

has roomy chapels at each side, and at the back is the shrine 
Si ft. square, containing a seated figure of Mah&vira. The front 
of the shrine is supported by two carved pillars, and at each 
side of the entrance is a Dw&rap&la carved on the wall as in 
Brahmanidal and later Buddhist caves. The style of the pillars 
and the whole execution point to about the 7th century as the 
probable date of the excavation.' 

Near Dhdr&sinvd, in the Haidar&b&d districts about 37 miles 
north from Sholapur, are several Jaina caves, of which two are 
of considerable size, the hall of the second in the group being 
quite 80 ft. deep and from 79 to 85 ft. across, with eight cells 
in each of the side walls and six in the back besides the shrine. 
The roof is supported, as at B&gh, by a double square of pillars, 
the outer of twenty and the inner of twelve piers. But the rock 
is a conglomerate of unequal texture, and has greatly decayed 
in parts. Much of the front wall and all the pillars of the 
verandah have fallen away, whilst the great frieze over the 
facade, once covered with bold Jaina sculptures, is so abraded as 
to be now unintelligible. Cave III., next to this, has a twenty 
pillared hall measuring about 59 ft. square, with five cells on 
each side and in the back the shrine and four cells. The 
verandah still retains its six pillars in front, and five doors 
lead from it into the hall. The next cave is about half the 
dimensions of this, and in all three the pillars, doorways, and 
friezes show remains of a good deal of ornate carving somewhat 
similar to what is found at Aurangabad, and pn the later Ajant 4 
caves.- 

At Kanhar, near Pitalkhora, are two Jaina caves, and there 
are others at Chamar Lena near N^sik, and seven at Ankai in 
Khandesh which are overlaid with sculpture. But these and 
others belong to the latest of rock excavations — probably of the 
I ith and 12th centuries — and have been described and illustrated 
elsewhere.’^ 


ElCra Jaina Caves. 

The Jaina group at Elura has been considered as the most 
modern there : an impression arising partly from the character 
of the sculptures themselves, which are of later Jaina style — 
more, however, from the extreme difficulty of comparing rock- 

' * Archaeological Survey of Wcalcrn j ■” * Cave Temples,* pp. 492, 493, and 
India,' vol. i. p. 37 and plates 47, 48; i 505-508, with plates 94, 95; ‘Archaeo- 
‘ Cave Temples,* pp. 503-505, and plate logical Survey of Western India,* vol. v, 
93. pp. 57-59, and plates 12, and 47-50. A 

- Drawings and plans with an account | few other Jaina caves exist at Junfigadli, 
of these caves are given in ‘Archceo- | and scattered over the Dckhan. — ‘Cave 
logical Survey of Western India,’ vol. iii. j Temples,* p. 490. 
pp. 4-8, and plates 1 -8. ' 



>o JAINA ARCHITECTURE. Book V. 

cut examples with structural ones. Our knowledge of the 
architecture of temples is, in nine cases out of ten, derived from 
their external forms, to which the interiors are quite subordinate. 
Cave-temples, however, have practically no exteriors, and . at 
the utmost fa9ades modified to admit more light than is usual 
in structural edifices, and then strengthened and modified so 
as to suit rock-cut architecture. As no ancient Jaina temple — 
except that of Meguti at Aihole — ^has a dated inscription upon it, 
nor a tolerably authenticated history, it is no wonder that guesses 



374. Entrance to the Indra Sabh& Cave at EIhrft. (From a Photograph.) 


might be wide of the truth. Now, however, that we know 
positively the age of one example, all this can be rectified, and 
there seems no doubt that the Indra Sabh& group was excavated 
— say not before A.D. 850. 

When with this new light we come to examine with care 
the architecture of these fa9ades, we find the Elfiri group 
exhibits an extraordinary affinity with the southern style. The 
little detached shrine in the courtyard of the Indra Sabh&, 
and the gateway shown in the above woodcut (No. 374), are 
as essentially Dravidian in style as the KailAs itself, and, like 
many of the details of these caves, so nearly identical that 


Chap. II. ELURA JAIN A CAVES. 2t 

they cannot possibly be very distant in date. May we, 
therefore, assume from this that the Chalukyan kingdom of 
B&ddmi, in the 7th century of our era, and the R 4 shtrakfita of 
Maikhed, which follow in the 8th to loth century, extended from 
Elflrfi on the north to the Tung^bhadrS and Krishna on the 
south, and that all these rock-cut examples, with the temple 
at Aihole (Woodcut No. 181), were excavated or erected under 
the auspices of these two dynasties! 

Both the caves named above are of two storeys with a 
number of smaller halls attached, and 
belonged to the Digambara division. From 
this circumstance and the appearance of 
Gommata along with P&r.nvanllth in a 
number of the shrines — as we find these at 
Bftd&mi — and that the only inscriptions are 
in Kanarese, we are led to infer that the 
excavators were from the south and brought 
the Dravidian style with them. In the 
right of the court is a large statue of an 
elephant, and on the left was a fine mono- 
lithic stambha 31 ft. 6 in. in height in- 
cluding the Chaumukh figure crowning it. 

(Woodcut No. 275). It fell over about 
thirty-two years ago. 

Near the ridge above these caves Is a 
colossal image of PAr.rwanath, inscribed as 
having been carved so late as A.D. 1235. 

And to the east of the other caves is a 
curious unfinished temple — an imitation on a 
small scale of the Brahmanical Kailds. The 
rikhara is low and unfinished, and the 
work was probably sifddenly left in this _ .. 

state.^ During a partial excavation thirty i„ the court of the 
years ago some loose images were found indraSabhft. 
Sated in 1247. Sc.ieioft.tox.„. 

Reverting to the remark as to the origin of these caves, it 
may be assumed that the theory represents the facts of the case 
more nearly than any hitherto brought forward. The Chaiukyas 
and R&shtrakdtas were situated on the border-line, half-way 
between the north and the south, and they,^ or their subjects, 
seemed to have practised the styles of architecture belonging 
to those two divisions indiscriminately — it might almost be said 
alternately — and we consequently find them mixed up here and 
at Dhamn&r in a manner that is most puzzling. 



* Cave Temples,’ pp. 49Sf. and plates 86-92. 




BookV. 


aa JAINA ARCHITECTURE. 

The last king of the early Chalukyas, Klrtivarman 11 ^ 
ascended the throne a,d. 746,* and was deprived of all his 
dominions by Dantidurga, the R&shtrakOta of M&lkhfid, by 
757. It was probably, therefore, after that date that th^ 
Dravidian temple*forms were introduced by the Jains at Elhrft. 
The Kail&s and other great 5 aiva temples were excavated by 
these R&shtrakdtas — themselves a Dravidian race — who carried 
their power up to the NarbadA 

Before Ibaving this branch of the subject there is one other 
rock-cut example which deserves to be quoted, not either for its 
size or antiquity,, but from the elegance of its details. It is 
situated at a place called Kalugumalai in the Tinnevelly 
district,* 27 miles south from 5rtvilliputt0r, and consequently 
75 miles north from Cape Comorin. Like the examples at 
MAmallapuram, this one never was finished, probably ^cause 
the person who commenced it did not live to complete it, and 
it was nobody’s business to finish what was of no use, and 
intended only to glorify him who made it It is not cut 
out of a separate boulder, but out Of a ridge, as I fancy 
those at Mflmallapuram to have been, and if successful, any 
number of others of any dimensions might have followed. 
The other side of the Kalugumalai hill had been occupied 
by the Jains, and numerous images of their Tlrthankars are 
carved upon it, with inscriptions that supply the names of 
the villages by which the different figures were carved. This 
little temple is now dedicated to Subrahmanya, but is said* to be 
originally Jaina ; it is probably of the loth or nth century, and 
if it had been completed it would have been one of the most 
perfect gems of the style. For some reason unexplained it was 
only blocked out, and the uppsr ^^rt only carved, when it was 
abandoned, and is now efitirely forsaken.’ From its details, it 
certainly is more modem than the Kailfls-^how much we cannot 
yet say with certainty. 


* 'Bombay Gazetteer,’ vol. i. pt ii. 
p. 376. 

’ Several photo^pbs of it are in the 
India office cdllecuon. 

* In the same rock is excavated a cave 


temple dedicated to Ganera or Pillay&r 
with a ptadakshina passage round the 
shrine. — * Cave Temples of India,’ 
p. 159; 'Indian Antiquary,’ vol. ii. 
p. 203 . 



CHAPTER III. 


JAINA STRUCTURAL TEMPLES. 

CONTENTS. 

Lakkundi — Pdlitkni— Girnir— Mount Abfi — Pkrasnkth — Rknpur- 
Gw&liar — Khajur&ho — Chitor. 


The temples distinctively Jaina in the Dhirw&r districts are 
not now numerous, yet there are sufficient remains at Belgaum, 
Fatladakal, Aihole,’ and at Annlgeri, Dambal, Lakkundi, and 
other places, to prove that Jainism was at one time very 
influential. Those at Fattadakal and Aihole have been briefly 
noticed above (vol. i., pp. 319, 356). It has been supposed that 
it was probably owing to a succession of able Digambara Jaina 
teachers, in this Kanarese country, during the 8th and 9th 
centuries, and who were favoured by the Rdshtrakfita kings 
of M&lkhed, that Buddhism waned in these districts, and finally 
disappeared. Respecting the temples, we learn that those at 
Anntgeri — probably erected in the loth century — with others 
in Mysore, were burnt by Rdjendradeva Cholft about the middle 
of the I ith century, and were restored by a local governor about 
1070. 

One of the most entire of the Jaina Temples is at Lakkundi, 
a village about 7 miles east-south-east from Gadag, in Dh&rwftr 
district.^ From the plan. Woodcut No. 276, it will be seen that 
it is not large. Though somewhat severe for a Chalukyan 
temple, it is exceedingly well proportioned. The jikhara, as 
seen in the photograph, Plate XIX., is entire and presents 
the appearance of a Dravidian work, and the head of the 


* * Arcbcolt^cal Survey of Western 
India: Belgaum and Kaladgi,’ pp. 1-5, 
12-13, 25-26, 35 and 37, where descrip- 
tions and plans of the temples at these 
places are pven. 

* In 1885 it was noted that all the 
temples here were being rapidly destroyed 
by ^ trees on their roofs, and by the 


materials being carried off for building 
purposes ; and in the end of 1897 the 
statement was repeated in the ’Revised 
Lists of Antiquarian Remains in Bom^j 
Presidency.’ The Jaina temple hat since 
been re-occupied; the others are now 
being looked after by the Archaeological 
Survey. 



34 JAINA ARCHITECTURE. Book V. 



276. Lakkundi Jaina Temple. 

Scale 25 ft. to z in. 

(From Plan by Mr H. Cousens.) 


walls is treated in a way suggesting 
direct descent from the M^mallapuram 
pagodas. To provide an upper shrine, 
which is a feature in most of the larger 
Jaina temples, the first storey of the tower 
had to be made a distinct feature, and 
with a projecting front or entrance. This 
temple has an outer open hallormandapa, 
having extensions on each side, with an 
inner hall about 20J ft. square inside, and 
a door on the south side as well as 
the entrance from the open mandap. 
It is difficult from a photograph alone 
to fix its age, but probably it belongs 
to the earlier half or middle of the 
lOth century. 

PAlitAnA. 

The grouping together of their 
temples into what may be called “ Cities 
of Temples” is a peculiarity which the 
Jains have practised to a greater extent 
than the followers of any other religion 
in India. The Buddhists grouped their 
stupas and vihAras near and around 
sacred spots, as at SAnchi, M^niky.^la, 
or in Peshawar, and elsewhere; but they 
were scattered, and each was supposed to 


have a special meaning, or to mark some sacred spot. The 
Hindiis also grouped their temples, as at Bhuvanejwar or 
Benares, in great numbers together ; but in all cases, so far 
as we know, because these were the centres of a population 
who believed in the gods to whom the temples were dedicated, 
and wanted them for the purposes of their worship. Neither 


of these religions, however, possess such a group of temples, 
for instance, as that at 5atrunjaya, or Pftlit&nft— as it is usually 
called from the neighbouring town, in Gujarat, about 35 miles 
from Gogh& and Bhaunagar, on its eastern coast (Woodcut 


No. 277). 

It is sacred to Rishabhan^th, the first of the twenty-four 
Jaina Ttrthankaras, and covers the two summits of the 5 atrun- 
jaya hill, each about 360 yards long, with the depression 
between them. They are grouped in separate enclosures called 
Tflks, surrounded by high battlcmcnted walls, each having at 
least one principal temple with varying numbers of smaller ones 




PALITANA. 


Chap. Ill- 
around it. 


as 


Nominally there are nine Tfiks, but more correctly 



eleven, and the number of temples and small shrines number 


The Sacred Hill of 5atninjaya, near PaUtAnA— looking south-west 


a6 JAINA ARCHITECTURE. Book V. 

over five hundred.^ The number of images of the Ttrthan- 
karas in these temples is very great, and is constantly being 
augmented ; in 1889 the number of separate images counted was 
6,449 exclusive of smaller ones on slabs. A few watchmen only 
remain during the night, at the gateways of the TAks. The 
priests come up every morning and perform the daily services, 
and a few attendants keep the place clean, which they do with 
the most assiduous attention, or feed the sacred pigeons which 
are the sole denizens of the spot; but there are no human 
habitations, properly so called, within the walls. 'The pilgrim 
or the stranger ascends in the morning, and returns when he 
has perform^ his devotions or satisfied his curiosity. He must 
not eat or drink, or at least must not cook food, on the sacred 
hill, and he must not sleep there. It is a city of the gods, 
and meant for them only, and not intended for the use of 
mortals. 

Jaina temples and shrines are, of course, to be found in 
cities, and where there are a sufficient number of votaries to 
support a temple, as in other religions; but, beyond this, the 
Jains seem, almost more than any sect, to have realised the 
idea that to build a temple, and to place images in it, was 
in itself a highly meritorious act, whilst they also share in the 
merits of its use by their co-religionists. Building a temple is 
with them a prayer in stone, which they conceive to be eminently 
duteous and likely to secure them benefits both here and here- 
after. 

It is in consequence of the Jains believing to a greater 
extent than the other Indian sects in the efficacy of temple- 
building as a means of salvation, that their architectural per- 
formances bear so much larger a proportion to their numbers 
than those of other religions. It may also be owing to the 
fact that nine out of ten, or ninety-nine in a hundred, of the 
Jaina temples are the gifts of single wealthy individuals of the 
middle classes, that these buildings generally are small and 
deficient in that grandeur of proportion that marks the build- 
ings undertaken by royal command or belonging to important 
organised communities. It may, however, be also owing to 
this that their buildings are more elaborately finished than those 
of more national importance. When a wealthy individual of 
the class who build these temples desires to spend his money 
on such an object, he is much more likely to feel pleasure 

* The officiet inventtiry, kept in the Remsim in the Bomhey Presidency,’ etc. 
Bhendu or treetury, nve the number (1885), pp. 188, 193'2i3 ; but in the 2nd 
of shrines in 1868 as five hundred and edition (1897) its Mitor hat employed a 
thirteen. A translation of this document different arrangement of die temples, 
was given in the ' Lists of Antiquarian 



PALITANA. 


Chap. IIT. 


*7 


in elaborate detail and exquisite finish than on great purity 
or grandeur of conception. 

All these peculiarities are found in a more marked degree 
at P&litilni than at almost any other known place, and, fortun- 
ately for the student of the style, extending over a considerable 
period of time. Some of the temples may be as old as the i ith 
century, but the Moslim invaders of 14th and 15th centuries 
made sad havoc of all the older shrines, and we have only 
fragments of a few of them.^ In the latter half of the i6th 
century, however, the Jains obtained tolerance and security, 
and forthwith began to rebuild their old fanes. From 1500 
they are spread pretty evenly over all the intervening period 
down to the present date. But the largest number and some 
of the most important were erected within the last seventy 
years, or within the memory of living men. Fortunately, too, 
these modem examples by no means disgrace the age in which 
they are built. Their sculptures are inferior, and some of their 
details are deficient in meaning and expression; but, on the 
whole, they are equal, or nearly so, to the average examples 
of earlier ages. It is this that makes 5 atrunjaya one of the 
most interesting places that can be named for the philosophical 
student of architectural art, inasmuch as he can there see the 
various processes by which cathedrals were produced in the 
Middle Ages, carried on on a larger scale than almost anywhere 
else, and in a more natural manner. It is 1 ^ watching the 
methods still followed in designing buildings in that remote 
locality that we become aware how it is that the uncultivated 
Hindil can rise in architecture to a degree of originality and 
perfection which has not been attained in Europe since the 
Middle Ages, but which might easily be recovered by following 
the same processes. 

Among the 5 atrunjaya temples there is every variety of 
form and structure, and a monograph on this group, fully 
illustrated, would be of great architectural, antiquarian, and 
mythological interest* The chief temple is that dedicated to 
Mulan&yak Sii Adiswzr or Rishabhan&th, near the west end 
of the Tfik occupying the southern ridge. It is described 
in an inscription at the entrance as “ the seventh restoration ' 
of the temple, carried out in 1530 by Karmasimha, minister to 
Ratnasimha of Cbitor. This ” restoration ” apparently consisted 


* The Dhnndiya or Lsmpdka sect 
(founded in 1451)9 refuse to worship 
inages, nor allow them or pictures in 
their UpAjrayas or places of worship, 
though tliey revere the Jinas.— Oriental 
Giristian SpecUtor,’ 1835, p. 295. They 


are blamed for causing destruction among 
the 5 atrun 3 aya temples in a feud between 
them and the Tapagachha Jains. 

* The 5atrumaya temples were sur- 
veyed by Mr. Cousens some years ago ; 
but the results are not yet published. 



28 JAINA ARCHITECTURE. Book V. 


in the rebuilding of an old temple dating from about A.D. 960, 
a new colossal image, and the building of the gateway in which 
is the shrine of Pundarlka.^ The great temple is an imposing 
two storeyed building with a lofty spire, and with its base 
surrounded by many small shrines. Within, besides the great 
marble image of Rishabha, there are literally hundreds of others 
of all sizes ; ^ and, as at Rinpur and elsewhere, there are 
miniature Muhammadan qiblas set up outside as a protection 
against Moslim iconoclasts. The area in front of this is flanked 
by two considerable temples on each ^ide — that on the north-east 
being an elegant two-storeyed temple of the peculiar Jaina form 
known as a Chaumukh or four-faced temple. This one has, in the 
central hall, a quadruple image of Santinath — the i6th Jina or 
Ttrthankara : the images are placed so as to appear as one block, 
a similar figure facing the four entrances. 

Round the great temple are others of many sorts : some 
containing samosaranas^ or Chaumukhs, as they are termed; 
others “paduka” or footprints of Adtjwar, and one of the latter 
shrines, erected in marble by Karmaj^h or Karmasimha in 1 530, 


is under a Rayana tree,^ the scion of that under which Rishabha 
inHdn is said to have attained moksha or 

ITTTTf^ .TTTl deliverance. 

1 1 largest temple in the Kharatara- 

Ij ! I vast Tuk, which occupies much of the 

W W north ridge, is a Chaumukh temple of 

M ^ ^ Adinath, erected in 1618, by Setthi 

I Devaraj, a banker of AhmadabAd and his 
I family — of whom his sons Somaji and 
- j ^ I ^ j Dupaji were Sanghapatis or leaders of the 
i 1^1 great pilgrimage at its consecration. It 
riv fczi® is of two storeys, and has a well-pro- 

portioned jikhara, 96 ft. in height and as 
shown in the plan (Woodcut No. 278) 

■ consists of a mandap on the east 31 ft 

278. Plan of Chaumukh 2 in. square with twelve pillars forming 

Temple at 5 atrunjaya. an inner square on which rests the dome 

‘ 21 ft. 6 in. across, and the shrine beyond 

it, is 23 ft. square with entries on all sides. 
In the centre of this is the gre'at quadruple image of Adindth, 


278. Plan of Chaumukh 
Temple at 5 atrunjaya. 
(From a Plan by the Editor.) 
Scale 50 ft. to 1 in. 


^ ‘Epigraphia Indica,’ vol. ii. p. 35. 
Pundarika was the chief of Rishabha’s 
disciples, and has a shrine at the entrance 
of this Tirthankar’s temples. 

* Among those in the shrine on the 
upper floor are images of the favourite 
•Sit or MahAlakshmt, and of Gautama < 


svSmi ; and in other temples are images 
also of Ganera, Sarasvali and other Hindis 
divinities. 

’ Gujariti— Samosan ; p. 34 np/e, 

* The Mimusops hexandria of Rox- 
burgh ; Hemachandra and others specify 
the vataoi Banyan as Rishabha’s Bo-tree. 



Chap. III. 


PALITANA. 


29 


placed on a marble throne about 11 ft. square, with pillars at the 
corners. The west half of the shrine is surrounded by a verandah, 
the pillars of which are very richly carved, having on their 
capitals musicians and dancing figures. The upper storey has 
elegant projecting balcony windows, and is reached by a stair 
on the north side of the temple. At the principal entrance 
are two very small shrines — on the right of Gaumukh Yaksha, 
and on the left of Chakrejvart YakshinI — the two spirits 
supposed to attend this Tlrthankara. 

A type of temple, unique in its arrangement, of which there 
are two examples here, may be noted. In the small enclosure 


called the Nandtjvara-dvtpa 
Tfik, on the south side of the 
northern ridge is the first of 
these. It was erected by the 
Nagar .Seth of Ahmaddbdd in 
1840, and as the plan (Wood- 
cut No. 279) shows, it is a 
square of about 32 ft. with 
verandahs about S ft. wide 
attached to each side. The 
floor is divided by twelve piers 
into nine smaller squares, and 
the domes of the roof are 
supported by arches between 
these piers. The walls of the 
verandahs and inner square 
are of perforated stonework, 
and it has entrances from all 



four sides — the principal being 279. Plan of Nandi^vara-dvlpa Temple 

on the west. Of the nine ScaiV»Tft.ton. 

smaller squares into which the 

interior is divided, the five inner forming a cross are occupied by 
pyramidal jrikharas with recesses on their four sides for marble 


images of the Tirthankaras. Hence they go under the general 
name of Chaumukhs. In the central square is the largest 


of these spires, and in the centre of each of the four arms 
of the cross is one of secondary size, with smaller ones on 
each side of it and pairs in contact in the corners. Thus 
they number fifty-three in all. The five larger Chaumukhs 
represent mythological mounts: the large central one represents 
5 atrunjaya itself On the west of it, towards the main entrance, 
is Asht^pada, on which Adijwar or Rishabha* is said to have 
obtained inoksha or complete emancipation ; in the north square 
is Meru-.yikhara ; in the south one 5 ameta-jikhara ; and in the 


east is a Samosan or Samosarana — a term we shall meet with 




30 JAINA ARCHITECTURE. BookV. 

again. The temple is thus a shrine of “Hi^h Places.” The 
other temple — ^almost a copy of it — was erected in the Vimalavast 
Tiik, some thirty-five years later. 

The Motudh Tuic, which occupies the east end of the 
depression between the ridges of the summit, measures about 
230 ft. by 224 ft surrounded by a lofty wall with round towers 
at the corners. It appears on the front part of the photograph, 
in Woodcut No. 2y^. This great square, besides the central 
temple, dedicated to Adinith, and measuring over all 81 ft. by 
67 ft. 6 in., contains also some fifteen other temples — some of 
respectable dimensions. The whole is surrounded by a bhamti 
or cloister of more than a hundred small shrines along the 
enclosing walls. This great .TQk was constructed in 1836, at the 
expense of 5 etthi MotLrih Amichand, a wealthy banker and 
merchant of Bombay, and of his family relations.^ In such 
examples as these we see the work that native craftsmen still 
execute when left to themselves. Unfortunately the exterior of 
the temple has been painted, in late years, in an exceedingly 
vulgar style.* 


GirmAr. 

The hill of GirhAr, in the south of the KAthiAwAr peninsula 
of GujarAt, not far from JunAgadh, is another tirtha of the Jains, 
as sacred, but somehow not so fashionable in modem times as 
that at P&lit&n 4 . It wants, consequently, that bewildering 
magnificence arising from the number and variety of buildings 
of all i^es that' crowd that temple city. Besides this, the 
temples themselves at GirnAr lose much of their apparent size 
from being perched on the brow of a hill rising 3,500 ft. above the 
level of the sea, composed of granite rocks strewn about in 
picturesque confusion. The hill is regarded by the Jains as 
sacred to Neminith, the 22nd of their Tirthankaras, and who 
is represented as the cousin of the Hindfi Krishna. 

Although we have a ‘ Gim 4 r M 4 h 4 tmyam ’ as a portion of the 
Satrunjaya M 4 h 4 tmyam,* to retail fables and falsify dates, we 
have at Gira 4 r inscriptions which prove that in ancient times 
it must have been a place of great importance. On a rock 
outside the town at its foot, called par excelUtue Junftgadh — the 

‘ ‘ The Temples of ^atranjaye,* pp. 22, and the tenets of the Tains will be found 
23, and photopaph plates 15, and 25-28. in Bttbler’s * Indian sect of the Jainas * 
* For a more detailed account of (English translation), London, 1903. 
iiatrunjaya, the reader may refer to * An abridged version of the ‘.Sist- 
‘ The Temples of jjatrunjaya’ (Bombay, runjaya Mihitmyam,’ is given in 'Indian 
1869), introduction— of which the test Antiquary,* vrti. sss. pp. S39-251 and 
was partly reprinted at Abmad&bdd, 288-308. The Gimtr or Raivata Mihd- 
1878 ; and partly in ' Indian Antiquary,’ tm)ram forms sections 10 to 12 (pp. 2W- 
VM. ii. pp. 354-^7. The early woiy 30a) of that work. 



Chap. III. 


GIRNAR. 


3 * 


Old Fort — Ajoka, B.C. 250, carved a copy of his celebrated 
edicts.^ On the same rock about A.D. 150, Rudradiman, the 
Kshatrapa king of Saur&shtra, carved an inscription, in which 
he boasted of his victories over the 5 Atakarni, king of the 
Dekhan, and recorded his having repaired the bridge built by 
the Maurya AA>ka and restored the Sudar.rana lake.* The 
embankment of the lake s^ain burst and carried away the bridge, 
but was again repaired by Skandagupta, the last of the great 
Guptas, in the year A.D. 457, and an inscription on the same rock 
also records this event* 

A place where three such kings thought it worth while to 
record their deeds or proclaim their laws must, one would think, 
have been an important city or place at tl^at time; but what 
is so characteristic of India occurs here as elsewhere Few 
material remains are found to testify to the fact Full four 
centuries of Moslim rule have obliterated most of the traces of 
antiquity. Still in the east of the town is a group of very early 
caves, but the quarry opened close behind them has probably 
destroyed numbers of them. None of them are laige, but they 
are of primitive forms and the carving quite archaic, whilst a 
fragment of a Kshatrapa inscription of about A.D. 185 found 
among them in 1874, indicates that they belonged to the Jains.* 
There is also an excavated hall and cell near the north wall of 
the town, with two pillars in front, and other two inside that have 
had richly carved bases and capitals. And in the (Jparkot 
or old citadel a complicated and very interesting rock-excavation 
was discovered about thirty-five years ago, me most striking 
feature of which was the extraordinaty richness of the carving 
on the bases and capitals of the pillars in the lower storey; 
nothing could exceed the elaboration of the carving on the bam 
of these. There is no trace of distinctively Buddhist symbolism 
here, and like the others they were probably of Jaina origin.* 

At. the foot of Mdunt Gim&r a stfipa was excavated in 
1889, but no inscription was found with the relics to indicate 
whether it was Jaina or early Buddhist* When Hiuen Tsiang 
visited the province, about A.O. 640, he says there were fifty 
monasteries here, mostly belonging to the Sthavira school of 
the Mah&y&na teaching ; and one monastery he says was 
on the top of Gim&r with cells arid gdleries excavated in 

* See mU, yoL i. p. 56 lut*. * * ArdMeologicel Survey of Weitem 

* ‘ Indian Antiquaiy,' voL vii. India,’ vol. iL pp. I 39 *i 4 i> ud pktea 

a57ff. ; ' Aieluedlogical Survqr of Western 16-90. 

India,’ voL ii pp. laS-ija * lUd. pp. I4i-I44« and plates 91-94. 

* Fleet, 'Gum Inscriptions,’ pp. **Joninal of the Asiatie Society of 
56-65 ; ‘ jonmal Bombay B. Asiat, Soc.,’ Bengid,’ voL b. p. 18. 

voL zviiL pp. 47-55. • . 



3 a JAINA ARCHITECTURE. Book V. 

the rock.^ It is doubtful if any trace of these is now known 
to exist 

The principal group of temples at Gim4r, some sixteen in 
number, is situated on a ledge about 600 ft below the summit, 
and still consequently nearly 5,000 ft above the level of the sea. 



'^80. Temple of Neminath, Girn&r. (From a Plan by J. Burgess.) Scale 50 ft. to i in. 

The largest, possibly also the oldest of these, is that of NemincLth 
(Woodcut No. 280). An inscription upon it records that it was 
repaired in A.D. 1278, and unfortunately a subsequent restorer 
has laid his heavy hand upon it, so that it is difficult now to 
realise what its original appearance may have been. This 
unfortunately is only too often the case with Jaina temples. If 
a Hindu temple or Muhammadan mosque is once desecrated and 


* Beal, * Buddhist Records,’ vol. ii. p. 269. 





Chap. III. 


GIRNAR. 


33 


goes to decay, no one ever after repairs it, but its materials are 
ruthlessly employed to build a new temple or mosque according 
to the latest fashion of the day. With the Jains it is otherwise. 
If a man is not rich enough to build a new fane, he may at least 
be able to restore an old one, and the act with them seems 
equally meritorious, as it usually is considered to be with us ; 
but the way they set about it generally consists in covering up 
the whole of the outside with a thick coating of chunam, hlling 
up and hiding all the details, and leaving only the outline. The 
interior is generally adorned with repeated coats of whitewash, 
as destructive to artistic effect, but not quite so irreparable. 

The plan and the outline are generally, however, left as they 
were originally erected, and that is probably the case with the 
temple of Neminflth. It stands in a courtyard measuring 195 ft. 
by 130 ft. over all externally. 

Around the courtyard are arranged some seventy cells with 
a covered and enclosed passage in front of them, and each of 
these contains a cross-legged seated figure of one of the 
Ttrthankaras, and generally with a bas-relief or picture represent- 
ing Yakshas or spirit attendants. But for the fall of the roc! 
there would have been nine or ten more cells, and indeeu 
this repetition of the images of saints, like the multiplication 
of temples, seems to have been the great aim of the Jaina 
architects. As we may see in a Hindd temple at Pramb&nan 
in Java, there were 236 small temples or cells surrounding 
the great one, and there, as here, each of them was intended to 
contain a similar image of one of the objects of worship. 

Nearer the entrance than the temple of Nemin&th is a triple 
one erected by the brothers Tejahpcila and Vastup&la,’ who also 
erected one of the principal temples on Abfl. From inscriptions 
upon its walls it seems to have been erected in A.D 123a The 
plan is that of three shrines joined to one hall, an arrangement 
not unfrequently found in the south, but occasionally also in the 
north, and which is capable of great variety of effect, and 
of light and shade to a greater extent than plainer forms. In 
this instance there is an image of Mallin&th, the 19th Ttrthankara, 
in the central cell, but the lateral rooms each contain a remark- 
able solid pile of masonry called a Samosarana — that on the 
north side named Meru or Sumeru — a fabled mountain of the 
Jains and Hindfls— having a square, base (Woodcut No. 281); 
that on the south, called Samet 5 ikhara — P&rasn&th, in Bengal 
—with a nearly circular base. Each rises in four tiers of 
diminishing width, nearly to the roof, and is surmounted by 

* The inscriptions ascribe the temple to Vastupila only, as “the elder brother 
of Tejahp&la.” 



Book V. 


34 ARCHITECTORB. 


a small square canopy over the imagea^ From this it would 
appear that with the Jains, the Mounts Girhir, Satrunjaya, Abfi, 



a8x. Plan of Temple of VastupAla. (From a Plan by J. Burgess.) Scale 50 ft. to x in. 


et&, were not only holy places, but holy things, and that with 
them — as with the Syrians — the worship of high places was 
really a part of their religion. 

^me of the other temples at Gimir are interesting from 
their history, and remarkable from fragments of an ancient 
date that have survived the too constant repairs ; but without 
illustrating them it would only be tedious to recapitulate their 
names, or to attempt to describe by words objects which only 
the practised eye of the Indian antiquary can appreciate. Forty 
miles south from the hill, however,- on the sea-shore, stands 
the .S'aiva temple of Somn 4 th, historically perhaps the most 
celebrated in India, from the campaign which Mahmfid of 
Ghaznt undertook for its destruction in 1025, and the momentous 
results that campa^n had eventually on the fate of India. 

As will be seen from the annexed plan (Woodcut No. 282) 
the temple itself never could have been remarkable for its 


* Tbew ue the form* in which stApas 
me aow repMwnted the Jains. — 

* AietHeolopeal Surrey of Western India,’ 
voL iL p. 170, and plates 33, ^ The 
Gttjaittf Samesan and Praknt Samo- 
fonma, Ftofessoi Barnett informs me, 
an lepsesented in Sanduit lay &mm> 
PMsmma “session” or *' asnse,” aiid in 


popular language indicates a "meeting 
place.” — ’ Cunningham, ‘ Archaeologicu 
Reports,’ vol. uL pp. lyo-iyi. The 
SdmaimfMWia pro^, commemoiates 
the Urthanlcara's mt sermon, and is 
Ulus analogous to Buddha’s ** turning the 
wheel of the law,” in the Deer Park at 
Benares. 



Chap. III. 


GIRNAR. 


35 

dimensions, probably it never exceeded about 130 ft over all, 
but the dome of its mandapa, which measures 33 ft. aaross, is 
as large as any we know of its age. From the accounts, 
however, which we have of the si^e, it is evident that it 
was enclosed like the temple of 
Nemin&th (Woodcut No. 280) in a 
cour^rd, and that may have been 
of surpassing magnificence. Though 
very similar in plan, it is nearly twice 
the dimensions of that of Nemin&th, 
and if its court was proportionately 
large, it may really have justified all 
that has been said r^arding its 
splendour. From what figments 
of sculptured decorations mnain, 
they, too, must have been of great 
beauty, quite equal to anything we 
know of this class, or of their age. 

It has been questioned, however, 
whether what we now see ate 
fragments of the temple attacked 
by Mahmfid, and con^uently 
whether they belong to the lOU oa. Plan of Temple at Sonmltli. 
or even the Qth centuiy, or whether (Rom a Plan by j. Burgm.) 
they may be due to a restoration s® »• to * ». 

which was effected in the 12th. The temple was dedicated to 
Somervara — the moon-lord — a name of 5 iva, who, as Ibn Astr 
states, was represented by a ling^am.* As the stoiy is now 
told, after MahmAd’s departure it was restored by Bhtmadeva 
of AnhilwAra Pattan, who reigned 1021-1073, adorned hy 
Siddhar&ja, 1093-1143, and lastly complete, if not rebuilt, 
by KumArapila in 1 168. Generally it is thought, and almost 
certainly quite correctly, that what we now see belongs to 
the last-named king, who is credited with a complete restoration 
of it, and a state visit to celebrate its consecration. Thouefa 
a Brahmanical temple, it illustrates the style employed by the 
Jains in Gujar&f in the 12th century. The interior of the walls, 
too, show that th^r are largely constructed of materials from 
an earlier fane. 



^ Some of the Muhammadan historians 
represent the idol as having a head with 
eyes, arms, and a belly. And after 
describing the destruction of thejneat 
idol, Fewta goes on to say, ^*There 
were in the temple some thousands of 
small images, wrought in gold and silver, 


of various ‘ .shapes and dimensions.” 
Brigg*. •Feruhta,’ Tol. L pp. 7a, 74. 
We must remember, however, that 
Ferishta lived five and a half oentuiics 
after the sack of Somnfith. nm Atfi’s 
account is the best.— Sir H. Elliot's 
* History of India,' vbl. ii. pp.* 470ft 


36 JAINA ARCHITECTURE. Book V. 

Mount Ast. 

It is hardly to be wondered at that Mount Abd, anciently 
Arbuda, was early fixed upon by the Hindfis and Jains as one 
of their sacred spots. Rising from the desert as abruptly as 
an island from the ocean, it presents on almost every side 
steep and rugged scarps some 4,000 fit. high, and the summit 
can best be approached by ravines cut into its sides. When 
the summit is reached, it opens out into one of the loveliest 
valleys imaginable, about 6 miles long by 2 or 3 miles at 
the widest, cut up everywhere by granite rocks of the most 
fantastic shapes, and the spaces between them covered with 
trees and luxuriant vegetation. The little Nakhi Tal&o, or 
Pearl Lake, is one of the loveliest gems of its class in all 
India, and a mile and a half from it, at Dilw&ra, the Jains selected 
a site for their Ttrtha, or sacred place of rendezvous. It cannot, 
however, be said that it has been a favourite place of worship 
in recent times. Its distance and inaccessibility were probably 
the causes of this, and it consequently cannot rival either 
.Satrunjaya or Gimir in the extent of its buildings ; but during 
the age of Jaina supremacy it was adorned with several temples, 
two of which are unrivalled for certain qualities by any temples 
in India. They are built wholly of white marble, though no 
quarries of that material, except of inferior quality, are known to 
exist within 20 or 30 miles of the spot, and to transport and 
carry it up the hill to the site of these temples must have added 
immensely to the expense of the undertaking.^ 

The more modem of the two is usually ascribed to the 
same brothers, Tejahp&la and Vastupila, whose names are 
associated with the triple temple at Girnir (Woodcut No. 281) : 
the inscriptions, however, ascribe the erection and endowment 
to Tejahpflla alone, in memory of his brother from whom it is 
also known as Lflniga’s Vasati or temple. This, we learn from 
the inscription, was consecrated in 1230 A.D., and for minute 
delicacy of carving and beauty of detail stands almost unrivalled 
even in the land of patient and lavish labour. It is dedicated 
to Nemin&th; the 22nd Ttrthankara. 

The other, built by Vimala, a minister or governor under 
Bhimadeva, in the year A.D. 1031,* is simpler and bolder, 

^ It is supposed the material must all of the temples in Samvat 1378, after 
have been brought from JSriwiv in the “theyhad been damaged by Mlechchhas” 
Bh8kar district to the south-east of Abii, (Moslims), it is stoted that Vimala, the 
near the shrine of Ambft BhawSni. How blessing of Ambd, built the temple of 

so much material and in such large Adin&tha in Samvat, ic^8 (a. p. 1031). 

blocks could have been carried up the 'Asiatic Researches,' vol. xvi. p. 313; 
mountain is difficult to conceive. 'Epigraphia Indica,’ vol. ix. pp. i48f. 

* In an inscription recording a repair I 



Chap. III. 


MOUNT ABU. 


37 


though still as elaborate as good taste would allow in any 
purely architectural object. Being one of the oldest as well as 
one of the most complete examples of a Jaina temple, its peculi- 
arities form a convenient 
introduction to the style, 
and among other things 
serve to illustrate how 
complete and perfect it 
had already become 
when we first meet with 
it in India. 

The annexed plan 
(Woodcut No. 283) will 
explain the general 
arrangements of the 
temple of Vimala, which, 
as will be observed, are 
similar to some we have 
already met, though of 
course varying consider- 
ably in extent and detail. 

The entrance is through 
a domed portico, facing 
which is a square build- 
ing supported by six 
pillars, and containing 
ten statues of elephants, 
each a single block of 
white marble, about 4 ft. 
high. On each of them 
was seated a figure on 
a rich hauda behind thp 
driver.^ These repre- 
sented Vimala and his 
family in procession to 
the temple ; but the 
figures have been de- 
stroyed by Moslim 
zealots, and an equestrian 
statue of Vimala has been placed in the doorway, made of 
stucco and painted in a style not deserving notice. Behind 
it, in the centre, is a Samosaran of three tiers as usual. 

The principal object here, as elsewhere, is a cell lighted 



Temple of Vimala, Mount Abd. 
(From a Plan by Mr. H. Cousens.) 
Scale 50 ft. to 1 in. 


^ The names of nine of the riders are carved on their seats, six dated in a.d. 1149 
and three in 1 180, 





3« JAINA ARCHITECTURE. Book V. 

only from the door, containing a cross-legged seated figure 
of the Jina to whom the temple is dedicated, in this instance 
Rishabhanftth or Adindth. The cell, as in all other examples, 
terminates upwards in a jikhara, or pyramidal roof,^ which 
in these Abfl temples, however, are too low to be properly 
designated spires. To this, as in almost all instancesi is 
attached a mandapa or closed hall, and in front of this a 
portico, generally of considerable extent, and in most examples 
surmounted by a dome resting on eight pillars, which forms 
indeed the distinguishing characteristic of the style, as well 
as its most beautiful feature. In this example the portico is 
composed of forty-eight free-standing pillars, which is by no 
means an unusual number; and the whole is enclosed in an 
oblong courtyard, 128 ft. by 75 ft. inside, surrounded by a 
double colonnade of srnaller pillars, forming porticos to a 
range of cells, as usual fifty-two in number,* with some extra 
chapels at the south-west comer ; these enclose it on all sides, 
exactly as they do in Buddhist vih&ras. In this case, however, 
each cell, instead of being the residence of a monk, is occupied 
by one of those cross-legged images of Jinas which belong 
alike to Buddhism and Jainism, and between which the untaught 
find it difficult to distinguish. In the south-west comer of the 
court, on a slightly higher level, is a small early temple of 
^Amb& * which is .somewhat out of alignment with the rest, and 
has apparently fixed the limit of the enclosure; there is also 
a suspicion that the central shrine, built of stone — not marble 
— may be of earlier date than the nth century.* 

In other religions there may be a great number of separate 
similar chapels attached to one building, but in no other would 
fifty-two be found, as in this example, or that surrounding 
the temple of Neminith at GirnSr (Woodcut No. 280), each 
containing an image of a Tlrthankara, and all so nearly identical 
as to be almost undistinguishable. With the Jains it seems to 
be thought the most important point that the Jinas or saints 
are honoured by the number of their images, and that each 
principal image should be provided with a separate abode. In 
other examples, however, it is only a separate niche. On some 
Jaina monuments the images of the Ttrthankaras are repeated 


* See ante^ vol. i. p. 322. 

* * Archivological Survey of Western 
India/ vol. ix. pp. 99, 100, 

* Ambi is a name of Durg^, and also 
of the Yakshini or familiar devi of Nemi- 
n&tba, the 22nd Tlrthankara, to whom 
Tejahp&la’s temple is dedicated. A 
laij^e black image of Nemin&th in an 
adjoining shrine might suggest that 


this temple was first dedicated to that 
Jina. Ambd figures largely in Jaina 
mythology; and her Hindd tenwle at 
Amb&jl, 15 miles north-east from Diinii, 
is visited by crowds of Jaina pilgrims. 

* Manv of the short inscriptions on 
the cell doors and the images in them are 
dated a century later than the erection 
by Vimala. 



Chap. III. 


MOUNT ABU. 


39 


hundreds, it may almost be said a thousand times over, all the 
images alike, and the niches arranged in row's beside and above 
each other, like pigeon-holes in a dovecote. 



Externally the temple is perfectly pl^iin, and there is nothing 
to indicate the magnificence within, except the spire of the 
cell peeping over the plain wall, thoi^h even this is the most 
insignificant part of the erection. external porch, too, 

is insignificant, so that one is totally unprepared for the 
splendour of the interior. 




40 


Book V. 


JAINA ARCHITECTURE. 

The woodcut (No. 284) will give some idea of the arrange- 
ment of the porch, but it would require a far ntore extensive 
and elaborate drawing to convey a correct impression of its 
extreme beauty of detail and diversity of design. The great 
pillars, as will be seen, are of the same height as those of 
the smaller external porticos ; and like them they finish with 
the usual bracket-capital of the East; upon this an upper 
dwarf column or attic, if it may be so called, is placed to 
give them additional height, and on these upper columns rest 
the great beams or architraves which support the dome, the 
springing of which is shown in woodcut No. 284 {ante, p. 39) ; 
as, however, the bearing is long, the weight is relieved, at 
least in appearance, by the curious angular strut or truss of 
white marble, mentioned above (vol. i. p. 315), which, springing 
from the lower capital, seems to support the middle of the beam. 

That this last feature is derived from some wooden or 
carpentry original, can scarcely be doubted ; but in what manner 
it was first introduced into masonry construction is unknown : 
probably it might be discovered by a careful examination of 
the buildings, in this neighbourhood.' It continues as an 
architectural feature down to the present day, but gradually 
becoming more and more attenuated, till at last, except in -one 
example at Delhi, to be mentioned hejreafter, it loses all its 
constructive significance as a supporting member, and dwindles 
into a mere ornament. 

The marble dome in this temple is of great beauty from its 
very rich carving, which may be judged of to some extent from 
the photograph, Plate XX. It differs in minor details from 
that in Tejahpftla’s temple (Woodcut No. 286), though the 
general design is the same, and the description of the latter, 
given below, will apply to this. In the roofs of the corridors of 
this temple also there is a series of carvings of most complicated 
ornamental designs that arc quite unrivalled anywhere else. 

In Jejahp&la’s temple, which stands to the north-east of 
the preceding, the procession of the founder’s family occupies the 
place of the cells in the east end of the enclosure behind the 
shrine.^ This corridor is separated from the court by a pierced 
screen of open tracery: a little rude and heavy, it must be 
confessed, but still a fine work of its kind. Behind it, in 
the centre, is an elaborately carved Chaumukh, with five 


' In the temple of Vadlpura-PSr^wa- 
nSth» at Anahilawada, built in 1594, 
we have an example of a temple of which 
the whole interior (illustrated in * Archaeo- 
logical Survey of Western India/ vol. ix. 
p. 49 arid plates 4, 20 and 21) is carved in 


wood. Jaina temples with carved wood 
facades and interiors are generally met 
with in the laiger cities. 

‘ ‘Architecture and Scenery in Gujarat 
and Rajputana/ p. 16. 



Chap. III. 


MOUNT ABU. 


4 * 


elephants on each side of vety excellent workmanship, and 
with rich trappings sculptured with the most e:fcquisite precision. 
The Moslim has, however, carried off or destroyed their riders.* 

The temple is entered on the south-west, from the court 
between it and Vimala’s by a stair at the south of the enclosure. 
The plan is in imita- 
tion of the older 
temple, from which it 
differs but little in size, 
measuring over all 
about 15s ft. by 92 ft. 

(JWoodcut No. 285). 

The pillars support- 
ing the porch are 
somewhat taller and 
of eight different 
types, as may be 
noted in the photo- 
graph (Plate XX). 

On the other hand, 
in Vimala’s the 
general style of the 
nth century is ad- 
hered to through- 
out ; the dome of 
the portico is slightly 
less in diameter than 
in the former, but 
quite rivalling it in 
elaboration of detail 
and beauty of design. 

On the octagon 
formed by the 
massive architraves across the heads of the pillars rests the dome 
(Woodcut No. 286). In both temples, a single block in the 
angles of the octagon suffices to introduce the circle. Aboye the 
second row of ornaments sixteen bracket pedestals are intro- 
duced supporting statues, and in the centre is a pendant of the 
most -exquisite beauty ; the whole is in white marble, and 
finished with a delicacy of detail and appropriateness of orna- 
ment which is probably unsurpassed by any similar example 
to be found anywhere else. Those introduced by the Gothic 
architects in Henry VII.’s chapel at Westminster, or at Oxford, 
are coarse and clumsy in comparison. It is difficult, by any 

* ‘ Pictureiqtte Illuslnitions of Indian Architecture,’ p. 4® i Tod’s ‘ Ttravels -in 
Western India,’ pp. 106-109, iii, 





4a 


JAINA ARCHITECTURE. 


Book V. 


means of illustration, to convey a correct idea of the extreme 
beauty and delicacy of these pendant ornaments, but the 
illustrations on Plate XXI. and woodcut No. 286 from photo- 
gfraphs will explain their form, even if it cannot reflect their 



*86. Pendant^n Dome of I'ejahpAla’s Temple ai'AbP. (From a Photograph. ) 


beauty. In each of them there are placed, on brackets round 
the circumference, sixteen four -armed female figures called 
Vidy4devts — goddesses of knowledge.^ In the roofs of the 
corridors, also, the coffers are carved in the richest and most 
varied patterns. 

Over the doors of the cells or kulik4s are forty-six inscriptions 
recording their construction and grants for the worship of the 

* B^Ier, ‘ Indian Sect of the Jainas,’ p. 104 and plates 84, 86. The engraver of 

English translation, p. 65. For other the above woodcut (No. >86) hat fidled to 

e**”^*^®***J «f*®******i **? I Archaeological realise that these figures have four arms : 

Snrvw of Western India, vol. ix. p. 49, otherwise it represents the roof quite 

and plates ao, 21, j p. 85 and plate 58 ; accurately, 



Chap. III. 


MOUNT ABU. 


43 


different Ttrthankaras they enshrine, chiefly by Tejahp&la and 
his relatives, and dated between A.D. 1230 and 1236.' 

The other two temples here are — ^that of Adin&tha, close to 
Tejahp&la’s on the south-east, of which the bhamti or sur- 
rounding enclosure of cells has been only partly completed; 
the other is a great Chaumukh temple of Adin&th, built in 
the middle of the 15th century — three storeys in height with 



open domed porticos on the four sides — that on the west 
being the principal, and having seventy-six pillars. 

As before hinted, there never seems to have been any 
important town on Mount Abfi. It was too inaccessible for 
that purpose ; but a few miles to the southward on the plain 
are the remains of an extensive city, called Chandrivati,* where 


‘ 'Epigniphia Indie*,’ vol. viii. pp. 
200-229. 

• Forbes ‘ RAs Milt,* vol. i. p. 274 ; 
Tod/ Travels in Western India,* p. 134. 
When the railway from AhmadAbdd into 


RAjputAna was making, the contractors 
destroyed and carted away, for culverUand 
permanent way, the marble temples that 
remainedatChandrAvatl— ‘Archaeological 
Survey of Western India/ vol. iz. p. 98. 



44 JAINA ARCHITECTURF. Book V. 

there are — or rather were, till about twenty-five years ago — 
extensive remains of Jaina and Hindfi temples of the same 
age and style as those on the mount, some of them probably 
more modern, but still all of the best age. The place, however, 
was destroyed at the time of the Muhammadan conquest in 
the middle of the 14th century, and has since remained wholly 
deserted. It has in consequence been used as a quarry by 
the neighbouring towns and villages, so that none of its buildings 
now remain. The fragment, however, preserved in Colonel 
Tod’s work and shown in Woodcut No. 287, but now destroyed, 
may serve to illustrate the style in which they were erected, but 
no two pillars were exactly alike ; it would have required 
hundreds to represent their infinite variety of detail. 

PArasnAth. 

The highest point of the Bengal range of hills, south of 
Rijmahal, has characteristically been appropriated by the Jains 
as one of their most favourite Ttrthas. They name it P&rasn&th 
and Samet i'ikhar, and no less than nineteen of their twenty- 
four Ttrthankaras are said to have died there, or rather “ attained 
to Moksha” — blessedness — among others P&r.rwanith, the last 
but one, and he consequently gave to the hill the name it now 
'bears. 

Unfortunately, lio photographer has yet visited the hill, nor 
any one who was able to discriminate between what was new 
and what old. Such accounts, however, as we have are by no 
means encouraging, and do not lead us to expect any very 
remvkable architectural remains. The temples on the hill are 
numerous, but they seem all modem, or at least to have been 
.so completely repaired in modern times that their more ancient 
features cannot now be discerned. Something ma^ also be due 
to the fact that Bengal has never been essentially a Jaina 
country. The PAla dynasty of Bengal seem to have remained 
Buddhist nearly to the Muhammadan conquest (a.d. 1203), 
when they seem suddenly to have dropped that religion and 
plunged headlong into the Vaishnava and i>aiva superstitions. 
Whether from this, or from some other cause we cannot now 
explain. Jainism does not seem to have taken root in Bengal. At 
the time that it, with Buddhism, took its rise in the 5th century 
U.C. Bih&r was the intellectual and the political centre of India, 
and Buddhism long held its sway in the country of its birth. 
Before, however. Jainism became politically important, the 
centre of power had gravitated towards the West, and Jainism 
does not seem to have attained any great importance in ^e 
cmintiy where it first appeared. Were it not for this, there 



Chap. III. 


PARASNATH. 


45 


seems little doubt but that Pilrasn&th would have been more 
important in their eyes than P&lit&n& or Girnir; but it is 
not so, and it consequently occupies only a very ‘slight corner 
in an architectural history of India. 

Besides the effect the Jains sought to obtain by grouping 
their temples on hill-tops, the love of the picturesque, which 
they seem to have cultivated more than any other sect in India, 
led them to seek it in an exactly opposite direction. Some of 
their favourite Tirthas are found in deep and secluded valleys. 
One at Mukhtagiri, for instance, near Gawilgarh, is situated in 
a deep well-wooded valley, traversed by a stream that breaks 
in its course into numerous picturesque waterfalls. 

Another example of this love of the picturesque is found 
at R&npur, near Sidari, in Godwir district of the Jodhpur 
territory. In a 
remote valley 
piercing the 
western flank of 
the ArSvalli or 
Ad&bal4 hills, 
there is a small 
group of temples, 
notperhaps so pic- 
turesquely situ- 
ated as those at 
Mukhtagiri, but 
of more interest 
architecturally, 
and situated in a 
spot evidently 
selected for its 
natural beauties. 

The principal 
temple here was 
erected during the 
rt'gn of Kumbha- 
karna or Kumbha 
R&nS of Mew4r.^ 

He seems to have 

been a liberal , 

patron of the Jains, and during his long and prosperous reign 
fllled his country with beautiful buildings, both civil and 
ecclesiastical. Amongst others was built this temple of Rftnpur 


' An inscriiuion slates lhal the temple was built by a Jaina named Dharanaka 
in A.U. 1439.— ‘BluiunaBar Inscriptions, pp. 





46 


Book V. 


JAINA ARCHITECTURE. 

in 1440, situated in a lonely and deserted glen, running into the 
western slope of the hills, below Kumbha’s favourite fort of 
Kumalmer. Notwithstanding former neglect, it is still nearly 
perfect, and is probably the most complicated and extensive 
Jaina temple in India, and the most complete for the ritual 
of the sect. 

It is raised on a lofty basement and from the plan (Woodcut 
No. 288) it will be perceived that it is nearly a square,* 198 ft. 
by 205 ft., exclusive of the projections on each face.. In the 



289. View in the Temple at RAnpiir. (From a Sketch by the' Author.) 


centre stands the great shrine, open on the four sides and 
occupied by a quadruple image in white marble of Adinfith or 
Rishabha, the first Ttrthankara, the temple being one of the 
Chaumukh class. In the upper storqr is a similar s^ne, 
apprrached by doors opening from the terraced roofs of the 
building. Near the four angles of the court ar^ four smaller 
shrines, and around them, or on each side of them, are twenty 
domes, supported by about 420 columns ; four of these domes 
or mandaps — the central ones of each group— are three storeys 
in height, and tower over the others; and one— facing the 




Chap. III. TEMPLE AT RANPUE. 4y 

principal entrance — is double, having a second dome over the 
inner, supported by the very unusual number of sixteen columns, 
and is 34 ft. in diameter, the others being only 2'i^ ft. Light is 
admitt^ to the building by four uncovered courts ^ at the sides 
of these domes, and forming the comers of a rectangle round 
the shrine 105 ft. from west to east by 95 ft. across. Around 
this are twelve domes— .three on each side — with the four 
smaller shrines already mentioned in the corners, and the 
whole is surrounded by a bhamti or range of cells for images, 
each of which has a pyramidal roof of its own. 

The internal effect of this forest of columns may be gathered 
from the view (Woodcut No. 289) taken across one of its courts ; 
but it is impossible that any view can reproduce the endless 
variety of perspective and the play of light and shade which 
results from the disposition of the pillars, and of the domes, and 
from the mode in which the light is introduced. A wonderful 
effect also results from the number of cells, most of them con* 
taining images of the Ttrthankaras, which everywhere meet the 
view. Besides the twelve under the larger rikharas there are 
eighty-six cell shrines of varied form and size surrounding the 
interior, many of them connected by inside passages, and all 
their fa9ades more or less adorned with sculpture. 

The general external effect of the Rdnpur temple may 
be judged of by the photograph, Plate XXII.; owing to its 
lofty basement, and the greater elevation of the principal 
domes, it gives a more favourable impression of a Jaina temple 
than is usually the case — the greatest defect of these buildings 
as architectural designs being the want of ornament on their 
exterior faces ; this, however, is more generally the case in 
the older than in the more modern temples. 

The immense number of parts in the building, and their 
general smallness, prevents its laying claim to anything like 
architectural grandeur ; but their variety, their beauty of detail 
— no two pillars in the whole building being exactly alike — ^the 
grace with which they are arranged, the tasteful admixture of 
domes of different heights with flat ceilings, and the mode in 
which the light is introduced, combine to produce an excellent 
effect. Indeed, I know of no other building in India, of the 
same class, that leaves so pleasing an impression, or affords so 


^ In the north-west court grows the 

S 'ana or Riyana tree, sacred to 
th, and a necessary adjunct of bis 
temple, -whilst beneath it is a slab carved 
with his P&dukd or footprints, represent- 
ing the spiritual authority of the 


Tirthankara. The two west courts are 
about 20 ft. by ft. and the two on 
the east about 26 ft. square, but with the 
inner corner of each cut off by a comer of 
the central platform. 



48 JAINA ARCHITECTURE. Book V. 

many bints for the graceful arrangement of columns in an 
interior.^ 

Besides its merits of design, its dimensions are by no means 
to be despised; it covers altogether about 48,000 sq. ft., or 
nearly as much as one of our ordinary medisval cathedrals, 
and, taking the basement into account, is nearly of equal bulk ; 
while in amount of labour and of sculptural decorations it far 
surpasses any. 

Another temple here is of marble, covered outside with 
sculpture, and contains a black stone image of P&r^wan&th. It 
is probably of about the same age as the larger one. 

GwAliar. 

The rock at Gw&liar is, and must always have been, one of 
the most remarkable high places in Central India, and s^ms, as 
such, early to have been appropriated by the Jains. Its position 
and its scarps, however, led to its being fortified, and, as one of 
the strongest places in India, it was attacked and taken by 
storm by Altamsh, the first Moslim Emperor of Delhi, in A.D. 
1232 ; and from that time till the fall of the Mughal empire it 
was held by the Muhammadans, or by Hindu kings subject to 
their suzerainty. Under these circumstances, we should hardly 
expect- to find any extensive ancient Hindi) remains in the 
place. The most striking part of the Jaina remains at GwMiar 
are a series of caves or rock-cut sculptures that are excavated 
in the rock on all sides, and amount, when taken together, to 
hardly less than a hundred, great and small. They are, how- 
ever, very unlike the chaityas or vih&ras of the Buddhists, still 
less do they resemble the Jaina and Brahmanical caves, already 
mentioned or hereafter. Most of them are mere niches to 
contain statues, though some are cells that may have been 
originally intended for residences. One curious fact regarding 
them is, that, according to inscriptions, they were all excavated 
within the short period of about thirty-three years, between 
A.D. 1441 and 1474. Some of the figures are of colossal size ; 
one, for instance, is 57 ft. high, which is greater than any 
other in the north of India, though in the south there are 
some which equal or compare with it, and, as free-standing 
figures, are expressive and more difficult to execute.^ 

* ' Pictares^ue Illustrations of Ancient pp. 93-98, and figs. 85-98; Sir L. Grififin, 
Arcbitectnre in Hindustan,’ p. 43, and ‘ Famous Monuments of Central India,* 
' Architecture and Scenery in Gujarat pp. 60-80, and plates 39-46 ; and Work- 
and Rajputana,’ pp. 19-33, and plates. man’s ' Through Town and Jungle,’ 

* ForulustmtionsofGwfiliarseeDr.G. pp. i8off. 

Le Bon, 'Les Monuments de I’lnde,’ 



Ckap. III. 


KHAJURAHO. 


49 


KhajurAho. 

Khajuriho, the ancient capital of the Chandellas, is situated 
44 miles east from Naugon^ about 145 miles W.S.W. from 
Allah&b&d, .Rnd about 150 miles south-east from Gw&liar. It 
is now a wretched deserted place, but has in and around it a 
group of some thirty temples, which are the most beautiful 
in form as well as &e most elegant in detail of any of the 
temples. now standing in India.^ 

So far as can be made out from inscriptions,* as well as 
from their style, it appears that all these temples, with two 
unimportant exceptions, were executed nearly simultaneously 
and almost within the limits of the i ith century ; and, what 
is also curious, they seem to be-nearly equally divided betiveen 
the three religions. Roughly speaking, they are located in three 
group^ two consisting of HindQ temples — 5 aiva and Vaishnava 
intermixed — and one exclusively of Jaina temples. In each 
group there are one or more greater than the rest, and round 
some of them a few subordinate shrines are placed ; but most 
of them are independent temples. Among the 5 aiva temples 
the principal is the Kandarya ' Mah&deva, of which a repre- 
sentation will be given further on; in the Vaishnava class it 
is the Chaturbhuja : * and in the Jaina the P&r.rwan&th: all 
three so like one another that it requires some familiarity 
with the photographs to distinguish the temple of one religion 
from those of the others. It looks as if all had been built by 
one prince, and by some arrangement that neither sect should 
surpass or be jealous of the other. Either from this, or from 
some cause we do not quite understand, we lose here those 
peculiarities we usually assign to Jaina temples of this age. 
The vim&na or xikhara is more important than the porch. There 
are no courtyards with circumambient cells; no prominent 
domes, nor, in fact, anything that distinguishes Jaina from 
Hindi! architecture. If not under the sway of a single prince, 
they must have been erected in an age of extreme toleration, 
and when any rivalry that existed must only have been among 
the architects in trying who could produce the most beautiful 

* In the first half of last century they ii. plate 95. ' The temple he calls Jina- 

were much more numerous — many having n&tha’s (No. 25), is that now known as 
been removed for building material. |^rrwan&th’s, whilst the temple of 

* The inscriptions are translated in Adin&th he calls Pftrrwanith’s. Plans 
‘ Epigraphia Indica,’ voL i. pp. I2i*i62. of the Jinanfitha (Pfirrwanfith) temple 

* Sometimes called the Rfimachandra and of the Ganthai are riven in ' Sorvqr 
or the Lakshmanji temple. A sketch Reports,’ vol. z. plate 8, and 'Journal 
map of the Khajnrftho temples is given of Asiatic Society of Bengal,’ vol. xtviii. 
in Cunningham’s ‘ Survey Reports,’ voL at p. 294. 



Book V. 


50 JAINA ARCHITECTURE. 

and most exquisitely adorned building. Altc^ther they may 
perhaps be more modern than the principal HindO shrines. 

The Jaina temples 
form a fairly qomj^ct 
group to the south-east 
of the others, and the 
largest and finestt of 
them is the P&rrwan&th 
temple, which extends 
to about 62 ft. in length 
by half that in breadth. 
It has an outside porch 
on two advanced pil- 
lars with two square 
engaged ones by the 
sides of the entrance. 
Inside, the mandapa, 
about 22 ft. by 17 ft, 
has four pillars, with 
respondent pilasters 
supporting the domed 
roof, constructed in the 
usu&l way by cusped 
recesses forming a re- 
markably beautiful 
design. Beyond the hall 
is the shfine, surrounded 
by a pradakshina 
passage. The outside 
walls are ornamented 
with numerous bands 
of mouldings and with 
three rows of statues, as 
is shown in the photo- 
graphic view, Plate 
XVIII. (frontispiece). 
At the back or west 
end an outside shrine is 
attached, projecting 
about 9 ft The temple 
was repaired and re-occupied by the Jains atout i860; but it 
had been restored and altered at a much earlier date.^ 

* An inscription on the door jamb^ in temple. But this doorway, Mr Consens 
characters of the 13th centn^, seeing to says, bears a figure of Vishnn on Gamda, 
be a copy fiwm a grant made in a.d. 955 and may have been taken from some 
which may be about the date of the Hindfi temple. 




Chap. III. 


KHAJURAHO. 


5 * 


An illustration of one of the great HindQ temples will be 
given further on, another view of one of the smaller Jaina 
temples, that of Adin&th (Woodcut Na SQo), will suffice to 
illustrate the style of art here employed. Its porch either never 
was add^ or has been removed and rejdaced in modem times 
by a brick abomination with pointed arches. This, however, 
hardly interferes with the temple itself. There is no thin g 
probably in HindQ architecture that surpasses the richness of 
its three-storeyed base combined with the extreme elegance of 
outline and delicate detail of the upper part. The sculptures on 
this temple, as Mr Cousens remarks, are chiefly dSwfr, and on 
the dsana or seat for the image 
in the shrine a figure of Garuda 
is carved, whilst a small loose 
image of a Jina is placed upon 
it, and no distinctly Jaina im- 
age appears on the walls. All 
this points to its having been 
built as a Vaishnava temple and 
afterwards appropriated by the 
Jains.^ 

The two exceptional temples 
above alluded to are, first, one 
called the Chausath Jogint, or 
sixty-four female demons. It 
consists merely of a courtyard, 
measuring 102 ft. by 59^ ft. and 
surrounded by sixty-four small 
cells, with one larger in the back 
wall, each of which is surmounted 
by a small spire, as shown in the 
woodcut (No. 291). This is 
essentially like a Jaina arrange- 
ment (see Temple of Neminith, 
for instance — Woodcut No. 280, 
page 32); but there is only a 
resemblance. We know of at least two other old 
dedicated to these Jogints: one is at R&ntpur Jhariftl in the 
P&tna estate, to the south of Sambhalpur, also with sixty-five 
cells or recesses, ‘ and another at Bher&gh&t, 12 miles below fab^- 
pur, with eighty-one recesses for the sixty-four J<^nts and thdr 




291. 


Chausath Jogin!, Khajuiftho. 
(From a Plan by Gen. Cunningham.) 
Scale 50 ft. to I in. 


^ ^ Photogrwhs of the Jaina temples are 
given in Sir L. Griffin’s * Famous Monu- 
ments of Central India,’ plates 48-51. 

* At this place there is a very remark- 
able and numerous series of temples, 


unsurveyed as yet, among which is a 
circular Chausath Jogint temple, ahont 
56 ft. outside diameter.—* Indian Anti- 
quary,* vol. viL p. ao ; * Surv^ Reporti,’ 
vol. xni. pp. 132 s/rayg. and plates 13, 14. 



5 * 


Book V. 


JAINA ARCHITECTURE. 

p<mgeners.* Both of these are circular enclosures with the 
shrines ranged round the inside of the walls. The temple itself 
it is true ^ gone — ^if any central structure ever existed — ^but 
what we see is probably as old as the 9th century, if not older.' 

The other exceptional building is one of totally different 
character, and is as remarkable for its extreme elegance, even 
at Khajur&ho, as the other is for its rudeness. It is called 
Ghantai, either from the bells sculptured on its pillars, or for 
some other cause unknown. Unfortunately, it is only a frag- 
ment — a skeleton without flesh — a few pillars of a douUe 
portico now standing alone without the walls that may once 
have enclosed them (Woodcut No. 292). 

From the form of several letters in an inscription, found 
near these ruins. General Cunningham was inclined to believe 
that this temple may belong to the 6th or 7th century of our 
era ; and from finding a Buddhist statue and a short Buddhist 
inscription near them, he was at first inclined to assign them 
to that religion. Later he made excavations on the site and 
found some eleven figures apparently Digambara Jaina, and 
two distinctively Vaishnava. Hence he concluded that it must 
have been a Jaina temple.' The plan, too, of the building, so far 
as it can be made out, is unlike anything we know that is 
Buddhist, but very similar to many that certainly are Jaina.' 

M this as it may, these pillars are singularly graceful in 
their form, and elegant in their details, but they do not belong 
to the early style to which they were at first ascribed. There 
are eight of these sandstone shafts, each 14 ft. 6 in. in height. 
These are arranged in two squares about 15 ft. apart, and 
between the two are some square pillars and a carved doorway, 
apparently the entrance to the mandap. On its lintel a four- 
armed goddess is carved, mounted on a Garuda, and a small 
nude male in each side niche: these could not have been 
prepared for a Jaina temple. Then the granite pilasters for the 
walls ate of various lengths, several having one or more blocks 
added above or below to make up the proper heights, and 
pointing to a reconstruction.' If it ever were completed the 
temple would be in plan almost a copy of that of PfUvwanith 
noticed abov^ having a porch on the east and a mandapa 
21 ft. 6 in, wide, with the second group of four carved columns 

^ ' Survey Reports^’ vol. ix. pp. 60-74, I ^ plans of similar Jaipa temples, 
and plates is-i5. The enclosure is 1 16 | see 'Re^rtdn Belgdm and Kaladgt,* 
ft. diameter inside. plates 10, and 45. These, however, 

* It it built of granite, and its plan and are more modern than this one. 

the forms of its rikharas, induce me to * Le Bon, ' Les Monuments delTnde,' 
believe it to be exceptionally old. p. 79, fig. 64 f 'Journal of the Asiatic 

* 'Aidasological Survey Reports,’ Society of Bengal,’ voL xlviiL pt. i., 

vol. ii. p. 431, and vol. z. p. 16. p. 294. 



Chap. III. KHAJURAHO. S3 

supporting its roof, and extending to the two square pilasters 



993. The Ghantai, Kbajur&bo. (From a Photograph.) 

now at the west end, which would be on the front of the 



54 JAINA ARCHITECTURE. Book V. 

shrine. And the shrine itself with the pradakshina would 
occupy about 17 ft. to the west of these pilasters. 

At the south-west comer, near where the shrine would have 
been, lies a life-sized figure of Adinflth, and from this, with the 
Jaina figures excavated by General Cunningham, one of them 



293. Temple at GyAraspin'. (From a Photpgraph.) 

dated in A.D. 1085, we learn that, late in the nth century the 
Jains had the place in possession. But it is also plain that they 
were reconstructing it of materials from older HindA structures. 
And the absence of debris suggests that either the walls and 
great spire never were constructed or that, at a later date, the 
entire materials were carefully removed. How long before 
the nth century the eight sandstone pillars were first carved 




Chap. HI. 


GYARASPUR. 


55 

we are left without evidence to determine; but there seems 
no reason for ascribing them to an earlier period than the 
commencement of the lOth century, and possibly they may 
be of even somewhat later date. 

There seems very little doubt that mcM’e examples of this age 
and style exist in Rajputana and Central India. At Gy&raspur, 
24 miles north-east from Bhils&, and 140 miles south-west from 
this, there is a group of pillars arranged like these and like 
them deprived of their walls (Woodcut No. 293). In the 
Mukandw&ra pass there is a third example, but of much 
earlier date.^ Was it that their walls were of burnt bricks 
or of small square stones which, being easily removed, were 
utilised ? My impression is, the latter was the case ; but 
be this as it may, these Gydraspur pillars are possibly also 
the remains of a Jaina edifice, but of an age considerabiy 
more modem than the Ghantai. They can hardly under any 
circumstances be ascribed to an age anterior to the great 
revival in the lOth century, and may not improbably belong 
to the 1 2th century. In the same town of Gylraspur is a very 
grand old temple apparently of about the same age as these 
pillars. But it has teen so ruined, and repaired, and almost 
rebuilt, that it is extremely difficult to say what the form or 
purpose of the original erection may have been. There is 
also a toran of great beauty in the village, probably of the 
iith century, and in fact throughout this region there are 
numberless remains which, if scientifically examined, would 
probably suffice to fill up some of the largest gaps in our history. 

At Bhangarh, for instance, in the south of the Alwar 
territory, there are some very beautiful temples in style 
resembling the Jaina.^ One in that neighbourhood photo- 
graphed by Captain Impey, may belong to the loth or 
iith century, and is as beautiful as any oi its class, either at 
Khajuraho or elsewhere, and near it again is a colossal Jaina 
image, called Nan Gfingi, some 20 ft. in height, which is 
apparently of the same age as the temples, and consequently 
anterior to any of the colossi at GweLliar or in the south of 
India.’ The Jain sect are numerous in Rajputana, and though 
some of their temples have long teen neglected and fallen 
into decay, some of them, being of the best age and un- 
restored, are of extreme interest to the investigator of Indian art. 


' * Picturesque Illustrations of Indian 
Architecture/ by the Author, plate 5. 

^ These are probably 5 aiva. At 
Nilkanth (old Rajor), also in the hills 
of the Tahla parnna of the same state, 
are some temples of about the 10th 


century, of great beauty of detail : 
probably they too are iaiva. 

* Imj^y, ‘ Views in Delhi, Agra, and 
Rajpootana,’ London, 1865, frontispiece 
and plate 60. 



56 JAINA ARCHITECTURE. Book V. 

An important group of ancient temples is reported at Osia, 
a decayed town about 33 miles north of Jodhpur. Among them 
is a Jaina temple of considerable size, which an inscription 
indicates as having been founded originally in the latter part 
of the 8th century; and the Hindfl temples may belong to 
somewhere about the same period. A careful survey of them 
might be helpful in settling the age of other monuments by 
supplying fresh links in the chronometric scale. 

As before mentioned, the Buddhists, though employing 
circular roofs, -and in all ages building topes with domical 
forms externally, do not seem to have attempted an internal 
dome, in stone at least It is a feature of both Hindu and Jaina 
architecture, and is specially prevalent among the northern Jains, 
though, why this particular sect should have adopted it, and why 
they should have persevered in using it through so long a period, 
are questions we are not yet in a position to answer. It was an 
essential feature in the architecture of the Moslims before they 



294. Porch of Hindh Temple nt Amwil, near Ajant^. 

(From a Photograph by Xfajor Gill.) 

came into India, and they consequently eagerly seized on the 
domes of Hindis and Jains when they first arrived there, and 
afterwards from them worked out that domical style which is 
one of the most marked characteristics of their art in India. 


Chap. III. 


AMWA. 


57 


Yet we must not forget that the Hindis dso have shown 
that they could, and did frequently employ the dome very 
successfully. ' Among examples of their use of it few are more 
pleasing than the little temple at Amw& or Amv&r, near Ajant& 
(Woodcut No. 294). It is only a fragment. The sanctuaiy 
with its spire are gone, only the portico remaining; and its roof 
externally is so ruined, that its design can with difficulty be made 
out. Yet it stands so well on its stylobate, and the thirty small 
columns that support the roof extemdly are so well propor- 
tioned and so artistically arranged, as to leave little to bp desired. 

The great feature of the interior is a dome 21 ft. in diameter, 
supported on twelve richly carved pillars, with eight smaller 
ones interspersed. Like all Indian domes, it is horizontal in 
construction, and consequently also in ornamentation, but as 
that is done here, it is as elegant or more so than the ribbed 
domes of western art. This one is plain in the centre, having 
no pendatit — ^which, however, is one of the most marked and 
pleasing features of such domes, as may be gathered from, 
the example in the temple of Vimala at Mount Abh (Wood- 
cut No. 284 and Plate XIX.). A larger and perhaps better 
example might be cited in the case of the great sun-temple at 
Modheri in GujariLt, when entire, but only the lower courses of 
its domes now remain.^ 

One of the most interesting Jaina monuments of the age 
is the tower, formerly known as Srt Allata’s,* which still adorns 
the head of Chitor (Woodcut No. 295, next page), and is one 
probably of a great number of similar monuments that may at 
one time have existed. From their form, however, they are frail, 
and trees and human violence so easily overthrow them, that 
we ought not to wonder that so few remain. This one is a 
singularfy elegant specimen of its class, about 75 ft. in height, 
and adorned with sculpture and mouldings from the base to 
the summit* It stands on a basement 20 ft. square and 9 ft. 
high, with a stair on the south side, leading to the doorway, 
which is 6 ft. 2 in. above the platform. The shaft of the tower 
is 12 ft. 10 in. square below, and is four storeys high to the 
open canopy of twelve pillars, the floor of which is 64 ft. 2 in. 
from the ground. An inscription once existed lying near its 
base, which is said to have given its da(e as A.D. 895,* though 

’ ' ArchsologiMl Surv^ of Western * ‘ Pictnresqae Illustrations of Andent 
India,’ vol. ix. pp. 75ff, and plates 49, w. Architecture in Hindostan,* by the 

* Allata, to whom the erection of this Author,* plate 8, p. 38. 
lower was ascribed, ruled between 953 * Tod, * RAjasthan,^ vol.. ii. p. 783- 

and 972, as we gather from inscriptions, (Madras ed. p. 699).' This would m 
and is the tath king, mentioned in before the time of AJlata. The tower is 
Tod’s Aitpur inscription. — ' Rftjasthan,’ also locally known as Kaitan Rftnfs— 
Tol. i. p. 803, Madras ed. p. 706. but who she was is unknown. 





Chap. III. 


CHITOR. 


59 


the slab has now been lost. This, however, is much too early a 
date for the style of the structure; and the discovery of a reference 
in a manuscript poem of late date ascribing it to Kumftrapila of 
Gujar&t(A.D. 1142*1172), though the style is in no way incon- 
sistent with such a date, as it is unsupported by any nearly 
contemporary record, is of no historical value.^ The tower most 
probably belongs to the 1 2th century, and, it is said, was dedicated 
to Adin&th, the first of the Jaina Tlrthankaras, and nude figures 
of them are repeated some hundreds of times on the face of 
the tower, distinguishing it as a Digambara monument, whilst 
Kum&rap&la was a S'wet&mbara.* 

The temple in the foreground is of a more modem date, 
being put toother partly of frs^ments of older buildings which 
have disappeared. 

Most of the buildings above described belong to the first 
or great age of Jaina architecture, which extended down to 
about the year 1300, or perhaps a little after that There seems 
then to have been a pause, at least in the north of India — caused 
probably by the devastating raids of ’Al&u-d-dtn and others 
into Gujarat and MftlwS in the end of the 1 3th century. But 
a revival took place in the 15th century, especially under the 
reign of Kumbha, one of the most powerful of the kings of 
the Mewir dynasty, whose favourite capital was Chitor. His 
reign extended from 1428 to 1468, and it is to him that we 
owe the other of the two towers that still adorn -the brow 
of Chitor. The older one has just been described and illus- 
trated. This one was erected to commemorate his victory 
over Mahmud Khaljt of MaiwA, in the year 1440.* It is 
therefore in Indian phraseology a Ktrtti or /aya Stambha, 
or pillar of victory, like that of Trajan at Rome, but in in- 
finitely better taste as an architectural object than the Roman 
example, though in sculpture it may be inferior. As will 
be seen from the next woodcut (No. 296), it stands on a 
basement, 47 ft. square and lO ft high, being nine storeys 
in height, each of which is distinctly marked on the exterior. 
A stair in the interior communicates with each, and leads to 
the two upper storeys, which are open, and more ornamental 
than those below. It is 30 ft. wide at the base, and 122 ft. 

' This is based on a verse in the had fallen; a fourth of it or M ft. has Imn 

* .9ri-Chiir9k{\tadiirga-Mahavtra-pras^da - taken down, and rebuilt with imitations 

prarasii,’ a poetical eulogy of a temple of of the old work to replace lost portions. 
Mahivfra at Cliitor, and dates at least ^ Thomas, *Path&n Kinp of Delhi/ 
three centuries later than Kumaraj^la’s p. 3U ; Erskine, *Memona of Baber,’ 
inscription at Chitor of a.d. 1150.— p*%; Stanley Lane-Poole, * Mediaeval 

* Epimphia Indica,’ vol. ii. p. 422. in&,’ p. 174. Previously, in ^ 1418, 

^ The upper portion of this tower had Kumtiha had defeated the armies of 
become shaken and one of the balconies Gujar&t and MAlwi. 



6o 


Book V. 


JAINA ARCHITECTURE. 



29<&. Tower of Vietoiy of Kombho lfUn& 
at CbUor« (F^rom a W^otograph.) 


in height ; the whole 
being covered with archi- 
tectural ornaments and 
sculptures of Hindfl divin- 
ities to such an extent as 
to leave no plain parts, 
while at the same time 
this mass of decoration is 
kept so subdued, that it 
in no way interferes either 
with the outline or the 
general effect of the 
pillar.^ 

The Muhammadans, 
as we shall afterwards 
see, adopted the plan of 
erecting towers of victory 
to commemorate their 
exploits, but the most 
direct imitation was by 
the Chinese, whose nine- 
storeyed pagodas are 
almost literal copies of 
these Indian towers, trans- 
lated into their own 
peculiar mode of expres- 
sion. 

Other examples of 
this middle style of Jaina 
architecture are to be 
found at P^ilit^n^,’ Girnar, 
and all the fashionable 
ttrthas of the Jains, but 
they have not been de- 
scribed or illustrated to 
that extent that enables 
us always to feel sure 
that what we see really 
belongs to this date, and 
may not be a repair or a 
modification of some pre- 
existing building. The 
Chaumukh — or Four- 


* The dome that now crowns 
this tower was substituted for an 
older dome since I sketched it in 

1839. 


Chap. III. 


TOWER OF CHITOR. 


6i 


faced — at F&litin& seems certainly to have been erected in its 
present form in 1618; tmd is a very grand and beautiful example 
of the style.^ The temple, too, of Adlrwar Bhagavan, which 
is the largest single temple on that hill, seems to have assumed 
its present form in 1530, though parts of it may be older. 
At least, it is certain that an older temple stood on the spot, 
though not with the fabulous antiquity ascribed to it by the 
priests, and credulously repeated by Colonel Tod.* 

Though deficient in the extreme grace and elegance that 
characterised the earlier examples, those of the middle style 
are bold and vigorous specimens of the art, and still show an 
originality and an adherence to the traditions of the style, 
and a freedom from any admixture of foreign elements, which 
cannot be predicated of the modern style that succeeded it* 


^ Burgess, * 5 atrunjaya/ p. 20, and 
photographs 6-12; the plan of this 
temple is given antej Woodcut No. 278, 
p. 28. 

^ Tod*s ‘ Travels in Western India/ pp. 
280, 281. 

* For Chitor, see ‘ Architecture and 
Scenery in Gujarat and Rajputana/ pp. 


33-35 and plates 19-21 ; Dr. J. F. 
Stratton’s ' Chitor and the Mewar family/ 
pp. 76-99; * Archseoli^ical Survey of 
India Reports/ vol. xxiii. pp. I 0 I»I 24 » 
and plates 20-25 ; G. Le Bon, M^s 
Monuments de ITnde/ pp. 99f. and figs. 
99-104 ; and Workman, * Through Town 
and Jungle in India,’ pp. 3051311. 



CHAPTER IV. 


MODERN JAINA STYLE. 

CONTENTS. 

SoD&garh— Jaina Temples at Ahmadibid — Delhi — Converted Temples. 


The two places in northern India where the most modern styles 
of Jaina architecture can probably be studied to most advantage 
are Son&garh, near Datid, in Bundelkhand, and Mukhtagiri, 
near Gawilgarh, 1 3 miles north-east of Elichpur in Ber^r. The 
former is a granite hill, covered with large loose masses of 
primitive rock, among which stand from eighty to one hundred 
brick temples of various shapes and sizes ^Woodcut No. 297, 
p. 63). So far as can be made out, most of these temples 
date from the i6th and 17th centuries, though a few of them 
ma^ be older. Their original foundation may be earlier, but of 
that 'we know nothing, no one having yet enlightened us on 
the subject, nor explained how and when this hill became 
a sacred mount. 

Like most Hindu buildings of the period, all these temples 
show very distinctly the immense influence the Muhammadan 
style of architecture had on that of the native styles at this age. 
Many of the temples here are surmounted by the bulbous 
dome of the Mughals. The true native jikhara rarely appears, 
but a modified form of it is prevalent, and the openings almost 
invariably take the form of the Muhanimadan foliated pointed 
arch. There is every variety of style and form, and generally 
each stands on a terrace, and is surmounted by one or more 
spires. The result is picturesque, but not satisfactory when 
looked closely into, and generally the details want the purity 
and elegance that characterised the earlier examples. There 
is not a tree or sign of vegetation to break the solitary 
appearance of the surrounding landscape.^ 

Mukhtagiri, instead of being situated on a hill, as the tirthas 
of the Jains usually are, is in a deep romantic valley, and the 
largest group of temples is situated on a platform at the foot of 

^ L. Rousselet, in ‘LTnde des Rajahs,* L. Grifhns ^ Famous Temples uf Central 
devotes three plates, pp. 396-398, to these India.* On maps this i)lace is some- 
temples; also plates 71 and 72 in Sir times marked as *'Sona^r.** 




64 JAINA ARCHITECTURE. Book V. 

a waterfall that thunders down from the height of 6o ft. above 
them. Like those of Sondgarh, they are all of the modern 
domed style, copied from Moslim art, and none of them, so far 
as can be ascertained from such illustrations as exist, remark- 
able for beauty of design. It would, however, be difficult to 
find another place in India where architecture is so happily 
combined with the beauties of nature, and produces so pleasing 
an impression on the lover of the picturesque, though nearer 
acquaintance may result in disappointment to the antiquarian 
student of the style.^ 

In remote parts of the. empire, and especially in the 
immediate vicinity of the older shrines, this Muhammadan 
influence was much less felt than in the places just mentioned. 
The modem temples, for instance, at P&lit&ni have domes, it is 
true, but they are much more directly the lineal descendants of 
the old Jaina domes than copies of those of the Mughals, and the 
foliated pointed arch rarely occurs in the walls of that temple 
city. It requires, indeed, a practised eye to discriminate between 
what is old and what is new, and without the too manifest 
inferiority of modem sculpture this would not always be easy 
even to the most accomplished antiquary. 

One example must for the present suffice to show the effect 
aimed at by this style in recent times, as well as to illustrate 
how. little it has degenerated from its 
ancient excellence. For, though this 
woodcut (No. 299) does not prove it, there 
are photographs which do exhibit the 
marvellous details of this temple in a 
manner not to be mistaken. It was 
erected about sixty years ago by S’eth 
Hathisingh, a rich Jaina merchant, at a 
cost of about a million rupees, and 
dedicated to Dharmanftth, the 15th 
Tlrthankara. In this instance the ex- 
ternal porch between two circular towers 
is of great magnificence and most elabo- 
rately ornamented, and leads to an outer 
court with numerous small shrines all 
round. In the centre of this is a domed 
porch of the usual form, with twenty-six 
piliats (see plan. Woodcut Na 298). This leads to an inner 
mandap or hall, two storeys in height, and with a roof of a form 
very fashionable in modern Jaina temples, though by no means 

‘ A third notable group of about fifty miles N.N.W. from Jabalpur.— /Archseo- 

e ina temples of moderOvdate exists at logical Survey Reports, vol. xxi. pp. 
uadalpur in Damoh 4 t*brict| about 64 106-167. 





Chap. IV. 


MODERN JAINA STYLE. 


6S 



View of the Temple of 5eth HathisingD at AtunadaDad. (Irroni a Photograph by Colonel Biggs.) 


66 JAINA ARCHITECTURE. Book V. 

remarkable for beauty, and difficult to render intelligible without 
more illustration than it merits. This leads to a triple sanctuary, 
marked by three ^ikharas, or spires, externally. Behind this is a 
smaller court with two groups of seven shrines, one in each angle, 
with a larger cell in the centre, and two — still more important, at 
the point of junction between it and the front court. To the eye 
of a European, unaccustomed to its forms, some of them may seem 
strange ; but its arrangement, at least, will probably be admitted 
to be very perfect. Each part goes on increasing in dignity as 
we approach the sanctuary. The exterior expresses the interior 
more completely than even a Gothic design; and whether 
looked at from its courts or from the outside, it possesses 
variety without confusion, and an appropriateness of every part 
to the purpose for which it was intended.^ 

Jain A Temple, Delhi. 

There is one other example that certainly deserves notice 
before leaving this branch of the subject, not only on account 
of its beauty, but its singularity. In the preceding pages it has 
frequently been necessary to remark upon, that curious wooden 
strut by which the Jains sought to relieve the apparent weakness 
of the longer beams under their domes. It occurs at Abfi 
(Woodcut No. 284), at Girn^r, at Udayapur, and many other 
places we shall have to remark upon in the sequel ; everywhere, 
in fact, where an octagonal dome was used. It was also 
employed by the Hindis in their torans, and so favourite an 
ornament did it become that Akbar used it frequently both 
at Agra and Fathpur Stkrt, For centuries it continued without 
much alteration, but in stone, as for example in the great Baoli 
at Bundi,® we find it a mere ornament, and it is generally used 
as such. It was left, however, for a Jaina architect of the end of 
the 1 8th cTr beginning of last century, in the Muhammadan city 
of Delhi, to suggest a mode by which what was only conven- 
tionally beautiful might really become an appropriate, and really, 
constructive part of lithic architecture. 

As will be observed in the next cut (No. 300), the architect 
^^as had the happy idea of filling in the whole of the back of 
the strut with pierced foliaged tracery of the most exquisite 
device — thus turning what, though elegant, was one of the 
feeblest parts of Jaina design into a thoroughly constructive 
stone bracket ; one of the most pleasing to be found in Indian 
architecture, and doing this while preserving all its traditional 

^ For more details see ‘Archaeological ^ ‘Picturesque Illustrations of Indian 
Survey of Western India,* vol. viii* pp. Architecture,* plate 17. 

87^, and plates 69-71, 



Chap. IV. 


JAINA TEMPLE, DELHI. 67 

associations. The pillars, too, that support these brackets 
are of great el^ance 'aind constructive propriety, and the whole 
makes up as elegant a piece of architectural design as any 



Upper part of Porch of a Jaina Temple at Delhi. (From a Photograph.) 





68 JAINA ARCHITECTURE. Book V. 

certainly of its age. The weak part of the composition is 
the dome. It is el^^nt, but too conventional. It no longer 
has any constructive propriety, but has become a mere orna- 
ment. It is not difficult, however, to see why natives should 
admire and adopt it. When the eyes of a nation have been 
educated by a gradual succession of changes in any architectural 
object, persevered in through five or six centuries, the taste 
^comes so accustomed to believe the last fashion to be the 
best, the change has been so gradual, that people forget how 
far they are straying from the true path. The European, who 
has not been so educated, sees only the result, without having 
followed the steps by which it has been so reached, and is 
shocked to find how far it has deviated from the form of a 
true dome of construction, and, finding it also unfamiliar, 
condemns it. So, indeed, it is with nine-tenths of the ornaments 
of Hindfi architecture. Few among us are aware how much 
education has had to do with their admiration of classical .or 
mediaeval art, and few, consequently, perceive how much their 
condemnation" of Indian forms arises from. this very want of 
gradual and appropriate education. 

Converted Temples. 

Another form in which we can study the architecture of 
the jams in the north of India is the courtyards of the early 
mosques which the Muhammadans erected on their first entry 
into India. So essentially do some of these retain their former 
features that it might be convenient to describe them here. It 
is doubtful, however, in some instances whether the pillars are — 
some or all of them — in their original position, or to what 
extent they have been altered or eked out by the conquerors. 
Be this*as it may, for our present purposes the one fact that 
is certain is, that none of them are now Jaina temples. All 
are Muhammadan mosques, and it will, therefore, be more 
logical, as well as more convenient, to group them with the 
latter rather than with the former class of buildings. 

Were it not for this, the Arhai-dtn-ka Jhompra,at Ajmtr — so 
called — might be, and has been, described as a Jaina temple : * 
it was probably built on the site and with the materials of 
Brahmanical ones. _ So might a great part of the mosque at 
the Qutb, near Delhi. That at Kanauj, however, was originally a 
rearrangement, and has been much altered since I knew it; 
that at Dh8r, near Mandfi, is of comparatively recent date; 
while the Hindi! and Jaina pillars, so frequently used at 

’ Tod’s * Rajasthan,’ vol. L p. 778, and plate Acing it. 



Chap. IV. CONVERTED TEMPLES. 69 

Ahmad&bdd in the fifteenth century, are all imported, and used 
in positions for which they never were intended. 

The astylar temples of the Hindfis were useless to the 
Moslims except as quarries — a purpose to which they were 
frequently applied ; but the light columnar style of the Jains 
not only supplied materials more easily adapted to their 
purposes, but furnished hints of which the Moslim architects 
were not slow to avail themselves. The architecture of 
Ahmad&bftd, for instance (A.D. 1410 to 1572), is derived far 
more directly from the Jaina than from any style familiar 
to their co-religionists in any other part of the world. The 
same may be said of that of Jaunpur, though in the last-named 
city there is hardly a stone that can be said to be derived 
direct from any previously existing building. 

The process by which this conversion of a Jaina temple 
to a Moslim mosque was effected will be easily understood 
by referring to the plan of that of Vimala on Mount Abfl 
(Woodcut No. 283, supra, p. 37). By removing the principal cell 
and its porch from the centre of the court, and building up 
the entrances of the cells that surround it, a courtyard, was 
at once obtained, surrounded by a double colonnade, which 
always was the typical form of a mosque. Still one essential 
feature was wanting — a more important side towards Mecca ; 
this they easily obtained by removing the smaller pillars from 
that side, and re-erecting in their place the larger pillars of 
the porch, with their dome in the centre; and, if there were 
two smaller domes, by placing one of them at each end. Thus, 
without a single new column or carved stone being required, 
they obtained a mosque which, for convenience and beauty, 
was unsurpassed by anything they afterwards erected from 
their own original designs. 



CHAPTER V. 


JAINA STYLE IN SOUTHERN INDIA. 

CONTENTS* 

Bettas — Bastis. 

A GOOD deal has been done in the way of photographing the 
monuments of the Jains in southern India, but few plans of 
their buildings and fewer architectural details have yet been 
properly published, so that altogether our knowledge of the 
subject is somewhat superficial ; but it is interesting from its 
extent, and curious from the unexpected relationship it reveals 
with other styles. The Jains are said to have come to southern 
India, owing to a famine in the north in the first century, B.C.^ 
We know from their cave temples that there were Jains at 
Aihole and Bddimi {supru, p. i8) as early as the end of the 
6th, or certainly in the yth century ; * but after that there is a 
pause or break of four or five centuries, when the style reappears 
in strength at Belgaum and in that neighbourhood in the nth 
and 1 2th centuries.^ In the same manner southern Jains seem 
to have pressed northward as far as ElflrA in the 9th century, 
taking their Dravidian style with them {supra^ p. 20) ; but there 
again we stop, in so far as any direct evidence has been found, 
till the great outburst of Jaina magnificence at the end of the 
loth century, which then seems to have continued in the north 
till disturbed by the Muhammadan invasion. It is by no means 
clear whether the destruction of their temples, as at Ajmtr and 
Delhi, may not have led many of the Jains to move south to 
the Dekhan. Of course it existed in Mysore long before, and 
some of the early kings of the Chalukya and Hoysala Ball^la 
dynasties were nominally patrons at least of the Jains. All 
their later buildings, however, so far as we know them, either 
at Somndthpur, Belfir, or Halebid, belong to the Brahmanical 
sects. 

1 * Epigraphia Indica,* vol. iv. pp. plates 36, 37, 48, and 49. 

34, 26, 28 ; * Indian Antiquary,’ vol. * But early in the 8th century Kunku- 
xxi. p. 60. mahftdevt, sister of Vijay&ditya, the 

■ ‘ Archseological Survey of Western Chalukya king, built a Jaina temple a 
India,’ vol.* i. pp. 25, 26, 37, 38, and Lakshmervar. 



Chap. V. 


BETTAS. 


If Buddhism was not prevalent or powerful in the south, 
there are eveiywhere traces of the prevalence of Serpent 
worship in those districts where the Jaina religion now prevails. 
Sculptured serpents, with many heads and in all their con- 
ventional forms, are found everywhere about and in the temples ; 
and Subrahmanya in South Kanara, below the Gh&ts, is still 
a principal seat of Serpent worship in southern India.^ It is 
not, unfortunately, easy to say how far Tree-worship was mixed 
up with the latter faith, but the observances of Serpent-worship 
are intimately connected with those paid to Trees, Trees 
perish more easily and quickly than sculptured stones, and 
when the worship ceases its traces disappear more readily. 
There are indications that it did prevail here also, but, till 
purposely enquired after, it is impossible to say to what extent. 
Enough, however, is known, even now, to justify the assertion 
that Tree and Serpent worship did exist antecedently in those 
districts in which Jainism prevailed in the south, as also in 
the Dravidian countries where the people are devoted to the 
worship of Siva, and the members of the Hindfi Pantheon.® 

The truth of the matter appears to be, that until plans are 
made available of their buildings it is idle to speculate about the 
introduction of Jainism into the south, or its vicissitudes during 
its existence there. It is a task which, it is to be feared, few 
are capable of undertaking, and that fewer still are willing to 
devote the time and labour requisite for its successful accom- 
plishment ; but it is worthy of being attempted, for, if successfully 
carried out, it would add to our scant stores of knowledge one 
of the most interesting chapters still available for the religious 
and artistic history of the people of India. 

Bettas. 

The first peculiarity that strikes one as distinguishing the 
Jaina architecture of the south from that of the north, is the 
division of the southern temples into two classes, called Bastls 
and Bettas.® The former are temples in the usual acceptance of 
the word, as understood in the north, and, as there, always 
containing an image of one of the twenty-four Ttrthankaras, 
which is the object there worshipped. The latter are unknown 

^ * Madras Manual of Administration,’ * Baslt, properly “Basadi,” is a Jaina 
Prelim, arts, pp. 82, 83. N^arkoil in monastery or temple ; it is the Kannada 
Travankor, is aUo a chief seat of Snake- form of the Sanskrit **Vasati ” having the 
worship. same meaning; Vasahik& is applied to 

^ In the Hinduism of Malabar, Phallic buildings including monastery and temple, 
and 5 'aktt- worship and Tree- worship are — BUhler, *Ueber das Lebcn des Ilema- 
inextricably mixed up with Snake-worship, chandra,’ p. 57. ’Betta,’ in Kannada, 
—Logan's ‘Malabar,’ vol. i. p. 183. means a hill. 



72 JAINA ARCHITECTURE. BookV. 

in the north; and are court}rards usually on a hill or rising 
ground, open to the sky and containing inoages, not of a 
Ttrthankara, but of Gdmata or Gdmatesvara so called, though 
he is not known to the Jains in the north. All the images on 
the rock at Gw&liar are of one or other of the Ttrthankaras, and 
even the Alwar colossus, Nan Gfingi, can hardly be identified 
with these southern images.^ The statues of this Jaina saint 
are among the most remarkable works of native art in the 
south of India. Three of them are well known, and have long 
been known to Europeans.* . That at 5 ravana Belgola attracted 
the attention of the late Duke of Wellington when, as Sir A. 
Wellesley, he commanded a division at the siege of Seringapatam. 
He, like all those who followed him, was astonished at the 
amount of labour such a work must have entailed, and puzzled 
to know whether it was a part of the hill or had been moved 
to the spot where it now stands. The former is the more 
probable theory. The hill, called Indragiri, is one mass of granite 
about 400 ft. in height, and probably had a mass or Tor stand- 
ing on its summit — either a part of the subjacent mass or lying 
on it This the Jains undertook to fashion into a statue 58 ft. 
in height, and have achieved ,it with marvellous success. The 
task of carving a rock standing in its place the Hindi! mind 
never would have shrunk from, had it even been twice the 
size;' but to move such a mass up the steep smooth side of 
the hill seems a labour beyond their power, even with all their 
skill in concentrating masses of men on a single point. Whether, 
however, the rock was found in situ ' ox was moved, nothing 
grander or more imposing exists anywhere out of Egypt, and 
even there no known statue surpasses it in height, though, it 
must be confessed, they do excel it in the perfection of art 
they exhibit.* 

The image at Kirkala in south Kanara, which is next in size 
— being 41 ft. 5 in. in height, and weighing about 80 tons * — was 

^ It would appear from the inscriptions vol. vii. pp. io8^/ seqq^ where the inscrip- 
on these statues in the south that they re- tions also are given. At 5 ravana-gutta, 
present B&hubalin a son of Rishabhanitha near Ilav&la in Mysore district, on a rocky 
and brother of Bharata. — * Indian Anti- height, is another of these statues now 
^ary,’ vol. vii. p. 353 ; vol. xxx. p. 248 ; abandoned, about 2o feet in height ; there 
Rice's ' Inscriptions at 5 ravana Belgola;’ is also one on a hill near Tippdr about 
introd. pp. 25 et stqq. The hrst of the 9 ft. high, but only in half relief ; and on 
^ree ICevalins or immediate successors the Chandragiri hill is an unfinished one 
of Mah&vtra was also named Gautama. about 10 ft. high. — Rice, ut sup,^ 29. 

^ Tliree from Kanara were engraved ’ The inscription on the statue ascribes 
in Moor’s 'Hindu Pantheon,’ 1810, plates it to Ch&munda-rftya, minister to the 

73 and 74 ; and two of them in Buchuian’s Ganga king Rdchamalla II. who ruled 
'Tourney throi^h Mysore* etc.’ vol. about A. D. 98a 

ill. pp. 83 and 410; also in 'Indian ^ 'Asiatic Researches,’ vol. ix. p. 285 ; 
Antiquaiy, vol. ii. pp. 129 and 353 ; ' Indian Antiquary,’ vol. ii. p. 353. 

yot V. p. 57; and 'Epigrapbia Indka,’ 



Chap. V. BE 1 TA 8 . 73 

moved certainly to the place where it now stands, and its date 
luckily is engraved upon it, — AJ). 1432. 

The third at YenOr or VenAr, also in south Kanara, is 
smaller, about 35 ft high apparently,^ and is the latest of the 
three, having been 
erected in 1604 
(Woodcut No. 301). 

All these three 
figures belong to the 
Digambara sect of 
Jains, being entirely 
naked; and all possess 
the peculiarity of hav- 
ing twigs or creeping 
plants twisted round 
their arms and legs, in 
the manner found in 
the cave-tem pies, and 
in having serpents at 
their feet. In the 
Jaina cave at B^d&mi 
a similar figure has 
two creeping plants 
wound round its arms 
and legs precisely as 
these twigs are here, 
and serpents at his 
feet, while the Diksha 
or Bo-tree is relegated 
to the background.* 

This figure, though 
possibly not so old 
as the cave in which 
it is found — say A.D. 600 — is much older than the three great 
monoliths, but represents the same individual — the ideal ^etic 
— who stood in meditation until the ant-hills arose at his feet 
and creeping plants grew round his limbs. This Gdmata, 
Gummata, or Ddrbali has no prominent place in the Swet&mbara 
pantheon, though P4rjwan&th is, with them, occasionally repre- 
sented in a similar position.* 



* Moor’s ‘ Hindu Panibeon,’ plate 73 ; 
'Indian Antiquary,' vol. v. p. 37. 

* ' Archseological Survey of Western 
India,’ vol. i. p. aj, plate xxxvii.. 

’ Nearly all the llrthankaras are sajd to 
have attained bliss (nuisAa) in this position 


called Kiyotsatga. In the 5 wet&mbara 
temples standing figures of Jinas are often 
placed on ea(A side of the^prindpal 
image and in Gujarfiti are known as 
'* KfiUsagtyas,” that is— figures in the 
Kftyotsarga mfidra. 



74 


JAINA ARCHITECTURE. 


Book V. 


BastIs. 

The principal group of Bastts of the Jains, above the Gh&ts, 
is that at 5 ravana Belgola. There are there two hills — the 
Indragiri, on whose summit the colossal image just described 
stands, and dominates the plain. On a shoulder of the other, 
called Chandragiri, stand the Bastts, fifteen in number. As 
might be expected from their situation, they are all of the 
Dravidian style of architecture, and are consequently built in 
gradually receding storeys, each of which is ornamented with 
small simulated cells, as was explained above, vol. i., p. 172, 
and will be more fully described presently. No instance occurs 
among them of the curvilinear jikhara or spire, which is uni- 
versal with the northern Jains, except in the instance of Eluri 
above alluded to. 

The following woodcut (No. 302) representing the Ch^munda- 
rAya and 5 ^sana bastts on the north side of the Chandragiri 
hill, with the stambha in front of the P^r.r\van^thasw^mi bastt, 
conveys an idea of their general external appearance, which 
is more ornamental than that of the generality of northern 
Jaina temples. The outer wall of those in the north is quite 
plain. The southern ones are as frequently ornamented with 
pilasters and crowned with a row of ornamental cells.^ The 
Chamunda-rSya temple is the most imposing on the hill, both 
in style and dimensions, and was probably erected about 1 1 35 a.d. 
Externally it measures about 70 ft. in length, exclusive of the 
porch on the east face, by 36 ft across. Inside is a mandapa, or 
hall about 28 ft wide by 29^ ft deep. The Dravidian mode of 
roofing does not accept the dome on an octagon, and here a 
square of four round columns, 8 ft 4 in. between centres, is 
surrounded*by another of twelve octagonal pillars, 19 ft. between 
the centres of the corner pillars. Behind the hall is a vestibule 
about 18 ft wide by 6 ft deep, from which the small shrine is 
entered — surrounded apparently by walls of unusual thickness to 
support the vimftna or spire.* The temple at the south side of 
this one is dedicated to Ad!.rwar, but known as the 5 ^sana bastt. 


^ The native Government Archaeologi- 
cal survey, carried on for many years past, 
has concerned itself almost exclusively j 
with epigraphy. A few plans and detail 
drawings have been inserted in the 12 
Quarto volumes, but descriptive details are 
few and me^re ; while, for the drawings, 
scales are either wanting or too short and 
uncertain to be depended on, and the 


lithography so poor that measurements 
cannot uways be trusted as accurate. 

^ The measurements here are taken 
from the plan in Rice’s * Inscriptions at 
Aavana Belffola,’ at Tr. p, 149, on the 
assumption that the scale is 1 : 147*5 — 
possibly intended for 12 ft. to i in. The 
plan shows the walls round the shrine as 
about 12} thick. 



Chap. V. 


JAINA BASTIS. 


75 


built about the same time, but which has now lost its jikhara— 
prolMibly destroyed ‘ 1 ^ the Muhammadans.^ The fine mftna* 
stambha, in the foreground, stands in front of the Pftrswanfttha- 



302 . Jaina Dastis at 5ravana Belgola. (From a Photogra]^.) 


sw&mi bastt. The .rikhara over the cell is always surmounted 
by a small dome, as is universally the case with every vim&na 
in Dravidian architecture, instead of with the amalaka ornament 
of the northern rikharas. 

When we descend the Gh&ts into Kanara, or the Tuluva 
country, we come on a totally different state of matters. Jainism 
is the religion of the country, and nearly all the temples belong 
to this sect, but there architecture is neither the Dravidian style 
of the south, nor that of northern India, and indeed is not known 
to exist anywhere else in India Proper; but something very 
like it, possessing similar peculiarities, recurs in Nepfll. 

The annexed two views (Woodcuts Nos. 303 and 304) of one 
of the largest of these temples, found at Mfidabidri, in Kanara, 
about 20 miles north-east from Mangalor, will give a fair idea 


* Rice’s ‘ Inscriptions st Ast'sns Belgola,’ pp. 35 and 50, 




76 JAINA ARCHITECTURE. Book. V. 

of the general aspect of these temples externally. There are 
some sixteen bastts at this place, of which the largest and most 
notable is the Hosa>bastt, built in A.D. 1430. They are much 
plainer than Hindfl temples usually are. The pillars look 
like logs of wood with the angles partially chamfered off, so as 
to inake them octagons, and the sloping roofs of the verandahs 
are so evidently wooden that the style itself cannot be far 



303. Jaina Temple at MiHdabidri. (From a Photograph.) 


removed from a wooden original. In many places, indeed, 
below the Ghclts the temples are still wholly constructed in 
wood without any admixture of stone, and almost all the features 
of the Mddabidri temples may be found in wood at the present 
day. The blinds between the pillars, which are there executed 
in stone, are found in wood in every city in India, and with 
very little variation are used by Europeans in Calcutta to a 
greater extent, perhaps, than they were ever used by the natives. 

The feature, however, which presents the greatest resemblance 
to the northern styles, is the reverse slope of the eaves above 
the verandah. The same style is found in the old temples at 
K&rkala and elsewhere in Kanara, but in no other district south 





Chap, V, TEMPLES AT MUDABIDRL 77 

of Nep&l ; but when we look for its origin, we at opce recognise 
it in the huts and houses of the district, from the thatched roofs 
of which it has evidently been copied. 

There are sixteen of these Bastls at Mftdabidri, though 
the Jain inhabitants of the village are now but few. The 
interiors of these temples are in marked contrast with the 
plainness of the exteriors. Nothing can exceed the richness 



304- Jaina Temple at Mftdabidri. (From a Photograph.) 


or the variety with which they are carved. No two pillars 
seem alike, and many are ornamented to an extent that may 
seem almost fantastic. This again seems an indication of 
their recent descent from a wooden original. Long habit of 
using stone would have sobered their forms : they are now of 
great thickness — it may even be said massiveness — and this is 
just such an excess of strength as a people accustomed to 
wooden architecture would employ when first called upon to 



7 * 


JAINA ARCHITECTURE. 


Book V. 



305. Pillar in a Temple at Miidpibidri. (From a PhotORraph. ) 


Chap. V. JAINA BASTIS. 79 

replace in stone supports which in wood would have appeared 
necessary to carry a heavy stone roof (Woodcut No. 305). 

Their plans, as far as can be made out from photographs, 
are those usual in Jaina temples — spacious, well-lighted porches 
or mandapas — of which there are three in the larger temples and 
two in the smaller — leading to a cell in which the images of 
one or more of the Ttrthankaras is placed, naked of course, as 
the southern Jains belong to the Digambara sect.^ 

Their age has been determined from inscriptions, and they 
date from about the beginning of the 12th century downwards — 
the finest belonging to the 15th century. 

Besides the greater temples,' there are several varieties of 
smaller ones which seem peculiar to the style — such, for instance, 
as the five - pillared shrine 
at Guruvflyankeri (Woodcut 
No. 306) belonging to a 
Jaina temple, in front of 
which it stands. Four- 
pillared pavilions are not 
uncommon in front of Hindfi 
temples in the south. There 
is a very famous one, for 
instance, on the opposite 
shore of India at M&malla- 
puram, but not one, that 1 
know of, with five pillars, 
or with access to the upper 
chambers. There are three 
of these upper chambers in 
this instance — the two lower 
now closed, but apparently 
originally open, but to what 
use they were devoted, or 
what purpose they were 
intended to subserve, is by 
no means clear. At the base 306. I'avJiion at GuruvAyankw. 
of the temple are a number ‘ ritmograph.) 

of stones bearing images of serpents, probably votive presenta- 
tions ; there are seven or eight of them, and the serpents them- 
selves are some with one, others three, five, -or seven heads. 

A third feature, even more characteristic of the style, is found 
in the tombs of the priests, a large number of which are found in 



' The three mandapas in the larger i the smaller ones, as the Ttrthankara and 
Bastts are known as the Tirthankara, | Namaskara mandapas. — Dr liultzsch’s 
Gaddige, and Chilra mandapas; and in j * Epigraphical Report for 1900-1901.* 


to JTAINA architecture. BookV. 

the neighbourhood of MAdabidri., Three of these are illustrated 
fn the annexed woodcut (No. 307). They vary much in size and 
magnificence, some being from three to five or seven storeys in 
height ; but they are not, like the storeys of Dravidian temples, 
ornamented with simulated cells and finishing with domical roofs. 
The division of each storey is a sloping roof like those of the 



p^[odas at K&thm&ndil, and in China or Tibet In India they 
are quite anomalous. In the first place, no tombs of priests 
are known to exist anywhere else, and their /orms, too, are 
quite unlike any other building now known to be standing in 
any other part of India. 

Though not the grandest, certainly the most elegant 
graceful objects to be found in Kanara belonging to the Jaina 
styles of architecture are the stambhas, which are found attached 
to many of their temi^es. These are not, however, peculiar 
to the place or style. Th^ are used sometimes 1^ the Hindfls, 





Chap. V. 


STAMBHAS. 


8f 


but then frequently as dtpd&ns, or lamp-bearing pillars, anfl in 
that case have some a^ngement for exhibiting light from their 
summits or round their shafts. With the Jains this does not 
appear ever to have been the case. Their pillars are the lineal 
descendants of those of the Buddhists, which bore either emblems 
or statues — generally the former — or figures of animals ; with the 
Jains and Vaishnavas they as generally bore figures.^ In the 


south, however, the Jains 
have two styles of pillars — 
the Brahmadeva Stambhas, 
bearing figures of the god 
Brahma, and the M&na- 
stambhas which are taller 
and bear a small pavilion on 
the capital.* The example 
here given of one of the 
latter class at Guruv&yankeri 
is a fair average specimen of 
its class (Woodcut No. 308). 
The sub-base is square and 
spreading; the base itself 
square, changing into an 
octagon, and thence into a 
polygonal figure approach- 
ing a circle; and above a 
wide - spreading capital of 
most elaborate design. To 
many this may at first sight 
appear top-heavy, but it is 
not so in reality. If you 
erect a pillar at all, it ought 
to have something to carry. 
Those we erect are copied 
from pillars meant to support 
architraves, and are absurd 



solecisms when merely sup- stambha .1 Ouniviyankeri. 

porting statues; we have, (From a Photograph.) 


however, got accustomed to 

them, and our eye is offended if anything better proportioned to 
the work to be done is proposed ; but, looking at the breadth of 
the base and the strength of the shaft, anything less than here 
exhibited would be found disproportionately small. 

On the lower or square part of these stambhas, as well as on 


' pp. vol. i. 348, and vol. ii. p. 21. 
* ‘Epigraphia Indica,’ vol. \iii. p. 123. 



82 


JAINA ARCHITECTURE. 


Book V. 


the pillars inside the temples at MAdabidri (Woodcut No. 305) 
and elsewhere in Kanara, we find that curious interlaced basket- 
pattern, which is so familiar to us from Irish manuscripts or 
the ornaments on Irish crosses. As pointed out elsewhere,^ it 
is equally common in Armenia, and can be traced up the valley 
of the Danube into central Europe ; but how it got to the west 
coast of India we do not know, nor have we, so far as I know, 
any indication on which we can rely for its introduction. There 
was at all times for the last fifteen centuries a large body of 
Christians established on this coast who were in connection with 
Persia and Syria, and are so now. It would be strange, indeed, 
if it were from them the Jains obtained this device. But stranger 
things have happened than even this in the history of architecture, 
and few things can be more interesting when the means exist 
of tracing any connection that may be detected between them. 

If any one wished to select one feature of Indian architecture 
which would illustrate its rise and progress, as well as its 
perfection and weakness, there are probably no objects more 
suited for this purpose than these stambhas, or free-standing 
pillars. They are found of all ages, from the simple and mono- 
lithic l&ts which Aroka set up to bear inscriptions or emblems, 
some 250 years B.C. down to the seventeenth or perhaps even 
eighteenth century of our era. During these 2000 years they 
were 'erected by the Buddhists and by the Jains, as well as 
by the other sects in all parts of India ; and notwithstanding 
their inherent frailty, some fifty — it may be a hundred — are 
known to be still standing. After the first and most simple, 
erected by Aroka, it may be safely asserted that no two are 
alike though all bear strongly the impress of the age in which 
they were erected, and all are thoroughly original and Indian 
in design.* 

It may be owing to the styloclastic propensities of the Moslims 
that these pillars are not iound so frequently where they have 
held sway, as in the remoter parts of India ; but, whether from 
this cause or not, seem to be more frequent in Kanara and 
■among the southern Jains than in any other part of India. In 
the north we depend mainly on the rock-cut examples for their 
forms, but they are so usual there that it seems hardly doubtful 
they were relatively as frequent in connection with structural 
examples, though these have generally disappeared. 

It has been suggested that there may be some connection 
between these stambhas and the obelisks of the Egyptians. The 

* Fergnsion, ' History of Andcnt and compared the ^aiva and Jaina pillars at 
Medieval Architecture,* vol. i. p. 479. ElM, shown in Woodcuts Nos. 20a and 

* With the Aroka Itts, and the 275. 
stambhas at KirM and Kanheri, may be I 



Chap. V. STAMBHAS. 83 

time that elapsed, however, between the erection of the monoliths 
in the valley of the Nile and those in India seems to render this 
very doubtful, though they were certainly erected for similar 
purposes and occupied the same position relatively to the temples. 
When, however, we look at the vast difference between their 
designs, it is evident, even assuming a connection, that vast 
ages must have elapsed before the plain straight-lined forms of 
the obelisks could have been changed into the complicated and 
airy forms of the Jaina stambhas. The two are the Alpha and 
Omega of architectural design — the older, simple and severe, 
beyond any other examples of purely ornamental objects ; the 
latter, more varied and more highly ornamented than almost any 
others of their class that can be named. 

We are hardly yet in a position to push these speculations 
to their legitimate issue, and must wait for further information 
before any satisfactory conclusion can be derived from them ; 
but meanwhile it may be pointed out how curiously characteristic 
of Indian art it is that this little remote province of Tuluva, or 
Kanara, should have a style of its own, differing essentially from 
that found in any other part of the Indian continent, but still 
having resemblances that suggest affinities with outlying and 
distant countries, with which one can hardly suspect any con- 
nection but for the indications suggested by their architecture. 

Such indications have led to the conjecture that some early 
connection existed between Nepfll and Tibet and Kanara.^ Yet 
the affinities in architectural style are explained by their natural 
and independent derivation in both regions from the humbler 
forms of the native dwellings that long experience had discovered 
as best suited to the special natural conditions which prevail 
in both the areas. That this has not been hitherto made clear 
is largely due to the circumstance that photc^raphers have 
directed their attention to important structures only, and have 
entirely overlooked the humbler native huts and houses that so 
readily explain the origin of the styles. It is not very difficult 
to conjecture how early and frequent intercourse may have 
existed between the Persian Gulf and the western shores of 
India, and how the relations between these two countries may 
have been so intimate as to account for the amount of what 
we now call Armenian forms that we find in the Jaina architecture 
of southern India, especially in that below the Ghits. It will 
require, however, that the Indian branch of the subject should 
be much more fully and more scientifically investigated than 
has hitherto been the case before it is worth while to do more 
than indicate how rich a field lies open to reward the industry 
of any future explorer. 


‘ voL L p. 386. 



BOOK VI. 

NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE. 


CHAPTER I. 

INTRODUCTORY. 

CONTENTS. 

Introductory — Dravidian and Indo-Aryan Temples at Pattadakal — Modern 

Temple at Benares. 


Of the three styles into which Hindu architecture naturally 
divides itself, the northern is found spread over a far larger 
portion of the country than either of the other two. It wants, 
however, the compactness and strongly-marked individuality of 
the Dravidian, and never was developed with that exuberance 
which characterised the southern style from the 15th to the 
i8th century. In many respects it resembles more the Chalukyan 
style, the examples being small and elegant, and found dispersed 
over the face of the country, where wanted, without any apparent 
massing together in particular spots. 

Unfortunately, we have no name which would describe the 
style in its ethnographical and geographical relations without 
being open to the objection of expressing either too much or 
too little. In this respect the southern style is singularly 
fortunate: Dravidian correctly limits it to people speaking 
T^mil, Telugu, or some cognate dialect ; and the country where 
the people speaking those tongues are to be found is generally 
and correctly known as Dr^vida - d&ra, or country of the 
Dravidians. 

The term Chalukyan, applied to the second style, is not 
so expressive; but it is unobjectionable, as it cannot mislead 
any one. It is only a conventional term, derived from the 
principal known dynasty ruling in that country, applied to 
a style occupying a borderland between the other two, but a 



Chap. I. INTRODUCrORY. 85 

land whose boundaries cannot yet be fixed with precision. 
Till they are, a conventional name that does not mislead is 
all that can be hoped for. 

If it were allowable to adopt the loose phraseology of 
philological ethnography, the term Aryan might be employed, as 
it is the name by which the people practising this style are usually 
known in India, and it would be particularly convenient here, 
as it is the correct and direct antithesis of Dravidian. It is 
evident, however, that any such term, if applied to architecture, 
ought to be descriptive of some style practised by that people, 
wherever they settled, all across Europe and Asia, between 
the shores of the Atlantic and the Bay of Bengal;^ and it 
need hardly be said that no such style exists. If used in 
conjunction with the adjective Indian or lndo-Aryan,it becomes 
much less objectionable, and has the advantage of limiting its 
use to the people who are generally known as Aryans in India — 
in other words, to all those parts of the country where Sanskrit 
was spoken, or where the people now speak tongues so far 
derived from Sanskrit as to be distinguishable as offsets of that 
great family of languages. Its use, in this respect, has the 
great convenience that any ordinary ethnographical or linguistic 
map of India is sufficient to describe the boundaries of the 
style. It extends, like the so-called Aryan tongues, from 
the Himalayas to the south of the Vindhya mountains. On 
the east, it is found prevalent in Orissa; and on the west in 
Mah&r 8 shtra. Its southern boundary between these two 
provinces will only be known when the Nizam’s territory is 
architecturally surveyed. 

Another reason why the term Aryan should be applied 
to the style is, that the country just described, where it prevails, 
is, and always has been, called Aryivarta by the natives 
themselves. They consider it as the land of the pure and 
just — meaning thereby the Sanskrit-speaking peoples — as contra- 
distinguished from that of the casteless Dasyus, and other tribes, 
who, though they may have adopted Brahmanical institutions, 
could not acquire their purity of race. 

The great defect of the term, however, is that the people 
inhabiting the north of India are not Aryans in any reasonable 
sense of the term, whatever philologists may say to the contrary. 

The Sanskrit-speaking people, who came into India 2000 

^ In 1848 Gen. Cunningham applied term that belongs to two continents to 
the term Aryan to the architecture of an insignificant valley in one of them. 
Kashmir, apparently on the strength of It was, besides, wholly uncalled for. 
a pun ('Journal of the Asiatic Society The term Kashmiri was anmly sufficient, 
of Ben^,’ vol. zvii. pt. ii., p. and all that was wanted lor so strictly 

242). This, however, was limiting a local a style. 



86 NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE. BookVI. 

or 3000 years B.C., could never have been numerically one- 
half of the inhabitants of the country, except, perhaps, in 
some such limited district as that between the Satlaj and the 
Jamni ; and since the Christian Era no Aryan race has migrated 
eastward across the Indus, but wave after wave of peoples of 
Turanian race, under the names of Yavanas, 5 akas, H6nas, 
Tflrks, or Mongols, have poured into India. This, combined 
with the ascendancy of the mixed or aboriginal races during the 
period when Buddhism was the prevailing religion of the country, 
has so completely washed out Aryanisin from northern India 
during the building ages, that there is probably no community 
there which could claim one-tenth of pure Aryan blood in 
its veins, and with nine-tenths of impurity the term is certainly 
a misnomer. If it were not, we would certainly find some 
trace of external Aryan affinities in their style; but in fact, 
no style is so purely local, and, if the term may be used, so 
aboriginal, as this. The origin of the Buddhist style is obvious 
and unmistakable; that of the Dravidian and Chalukyan 
nearly as certain, though not quite so obvious ; but the origin 
of the northern HindQ style remains a mystery, unless, indeed, 
the solution suggested above {anU^ vol. i. p. 325) be considered an 
explanation. It may be so, to some extent; but I confess 
it is to my mind neither quite satisfactory nor sufficient. 

Thestyle was adopted by the Jains, and several examples 
of the peculiar forms of their viminas, or rikharas have already 
been given (Woodcuts Nos. 290, 299, etc.) ; but it still remains 
to be ascertained from what original form the curvilinear square 
tower could have arisen. There is nothing in Buddhist, or 
any other art, at all like it. It does not seem to have been 
derived from any wooden form we know, nor from any 'brick 
or stone, or tile mode of roofing found anywhere else. I have 
looked longer, and, perhaps, thought mure, on this problem 
than on any other of its class connected with Indian archi- 
tecture, but I have no more plausible suggestion to offer than 
that hinted at above. The real solution will probably be found 
in the accidental discovery of old temples — so old as to betray 
in their primitive rudeness the secret we are now guessing at 
in vain. Meanwhile, we probably may remain sure that it was 
not an imported form, but an indigenous production, and that 
it has no connection with the architecture of any other people 
outside of India. 

The view above proposed for the origin of the style derives 
considerable support from the mode in which the temples are 
now found distributed. There are perhaps more temples now 
in Orissa than in all the rest of Hindustan put tc^ether. They 
are very frequent in Mah^rAshtra, and, if we admit the Jains 



Chap. I. 


INTRODUCTORY. 


87 


who adopted this style, they are ten times more frequent in 
Gujar&t, Rajputana and the valley of the Narbad& than in the 
valley of the Ganges, or in Ary&varta, properly so called. The 
first and most obvious explanation of this fact must be that 
the last-named countiy has for 600 years been occupied by 
a Muhammadan empire, and they, hating idolatry and idol 
temples, have destroyed them wherever they were so absolutely 
in possession of the country as to be able to do so with impunity. 
My impression, however, is that it does not correctly represent 
the whole state of the case. That the Moslims did ruthlessly 
destroy Jaina and Hindil temples at Ajmtr, Delhi, Kanauj, and 
elsewhere in northern India, is quite true, but it was, partly 
at least, because their columns served so admirably for the 
construction of their mosques. The astylar temples of the 
followers of 5 iva or Vishnu could have served principally a^ 
quarries, and stones that had been previously used in Hindfi 
temples have not been traced to a large extent in Moslim 
buildings. But admitting that at Delhi or Allahib&d, or any 
of their northern capitals, all Hindi! buildings have been 
utilised, this hardly would have been supposed the case at such 
a provincial capital as Faiz&b&d, once Ayodhyft, the celebrated 
capital of Dararatha, the father of R&ma the hero of the 
R&m&yana, but where little besides a few pillars in Bflbar’s 
mosque can be discovered that belongs to any ancient building.^ 
The most crucial instance, however, is the city of Benares, 
so long the sacred city, par excellence, of the Hindfis, yet, so 
far as is known, no vestige of an ancient HindO temple exists 
within its present precincts. James Prinsep resided there for 
ten years, and Major Kittoe, who had a keener eye than even 
his great master for an architectural form, lived long there as 
an archaeologist and architect. They drew and measured every- 
thing, yet neither of them ever thought that they had found 
anything that was ancient ; and it was not till Messrs. Home 
and Sherring* started the theory that the buildings around the 
Bakariyai Kund were ancient Buddhist or HindQ remains, that 
any one had discovered any traces of antiquity in that city. 
But the buildings about the Bakarty^ Kund were erected by 

' ‘Gazetteer of Oudh’ (1877), vol. i. ‘ Archseolorical Reports,’ vol. L pp. 293 
p. 7. Saiir Mas‘a<l Ghazi, the nephew et seqg. Thje truth of the matter, how- 
of MahmQd of Ghazni, passed through ever, is, that neither Fah Hian nor Iliuen 
Ayodhy 4 in 1033, and would hardly have ' Tsiang were ever near the place. The 
failed to display his iconoclastic zeal, city they visited, and where the Tooth- 
Gen. Cunningham attempts to identify brusli-tree grew, has not been identified, 
the various mounds at this place with * ' Sacred City of the Hindus,’ London, 
those described as existing in Sflketa 1868, pp. 271 et seqq . ; ‘Journal of the 
by the Buddhist Pilgrims. — ‘Ancient Asiatic Society of Bengal,’ voL xxxiv 
Geography of India,’ pp. 401 et seqq. ; pp. i et seqq. 



88 


NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 


Muhammadans, and the pillars and roofing-stones, with a few 
possible exceptions, were carved by them for the purposes for 
which they were applied. They may have used the stones of 
deserted monasteries, or other Buddhist or Hindi! buildings, 
in the foundations or on their terraces, or for little detached 
pavilions; but all the architecture, properly so called, is in a 
style invented, or at least introduced by the Path&ns, and 
brought to perfection undbr Akbar. 

That the Muslims destroyed Hindfi temples all over the 
south of Hindustan and in their raids into the Dekhan is 
certain, but it was not till the time of Aurangzib that any 
of their monarchs felt himself sufficiently powerful or was so 
bigoted as to dare the power and enmity of the BtAhmans of 
Benares, by erecting a mosque on the site of one of their most 
sacred temples as an insult and a defiance to the Hindils. 
Even then, had such a temple as the great one at Bhuvanerwar 
existed in Benares, every stone of which, from the ground to 
the kalas, is covered with carving, it seems remarkable that all 
these carved stones should be hid away and not one now to be 
found. But so it appears ; still we know historically that there 
were many temples in the city, and during the pre-Mughal 
period the city was often sacked, whilst the river courses have 
changed and probably buried what the Moslim failed to destroy. 

The rock at Gw&liar was one of the earliest conquests of 
the Moslims, and they held it more or less directly for five 
centuries. They built palaces and mosques within its precincts, 
yet the most conspicuous objects on the hill are Hindd temples, 
that were erected before they obtained possession of it. In 
like manner Chitor was thrice besieged and thrice sacked by 
the Muhammadans, but numerous buildings there are* com- 
paratively intact 

The instances of early temples discovered during the last 
forty years, however, bears some testimony to the numbers that 
must have existed all over the country prior to the Musalmdn 
conquests. These are very numerous in the west and south- 
west of Bengal, where the Aryan element in the population is a 
minimum. No temples are mentioned in the Vedas or the older 
Indian writings, and were not required for the simple quasi- 
domestic rites of their worship ; and so long as they remained 
pure perhaps no temples were built. With the introduction of 
the Brahmanic ritual they became a necessity. It is to be under- 
stood then that though we may use the term Indo- Aryan as 
the most convenient to describe and define the limits of the 
northern style, the name it is intended to convey is, that the 
style arose in a country which they once occupied, and in which 
they have left a strong impress of their superior mental power 



5IKHARAS AND PLANS 


Chap. I. 5IKHARAS AND FLANS 89 

and civilisation, and over which the languages spoken are of 
Sanskritic descent. 

If this reservation is always borne in mind, I know of no 
term that more conveniently expresses the characteristics of 
this style, and it is consequently proposed to adopt it in the 
following pages as the name of the style that prevailed among 
the Hindfls in northern India, between the Himilaya and 
Vindhya mountains, and even much further south, from the 
7th century to the present day. 




Ilf' fiwFH -y 


f ) I 








309. Dravidian and Indo-Aryan Temples at Paltadakal. (From a Photograph.) 


The general appearance of the northern temples, and the 
points of difference between them and those of the south, will 
be appreciated from the above woodcut (No. 309), representing 
two very ancient temples, built in juxtaposition at Pattadakal, 
in Bijapur district. That on the left is a complete specimen 
of Dravidian architecture {ante, vol. i. p. 355). There is the same 
pyramidal form, the same distinction of storeys, the same cells 
on each, as we find at M&mallapuram (Woodcut No. 185), at 
Tanjor (Woodcut No. 213), or at Madura (Woodcut No. 193). 
The right-hand temple— that of Galagan^th, to the north-west 
of Sangamejvar’s — is Indo-Aryan of somewhat later date, 
and in which, on the contrary, the outline of the pyramid is 
curvilinear; no trace of division of storeys is observable, no 
reminiscence of habitations and no pillars or pilasters any- 





90 


NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 


where. Even in its modem form (Woodcut No. 310), it 
still retains the same characteristics, and all the lines of the 

pyramid or fikhara are curvilinear, 
the base polygonal. No trace of 
utilitarianism is visible anywhere. 
If Woodcut No. 310 is compared 
with that at vol. i. page 339 (Woodcut 
No. 195), the two styles will be ex- 
hibited in their most modern garbs, 
when, after more than 1000 years’ 
practice, they have receded furthest 
from the forms in which we first meet 
them. Yet the Madras temple retains 
the memory of its storeys and its 
cells. The Bengal example recalls 
nothing known in civil or domestic 
architecture. 

Neither the pyramid nor the 
tumulus affords any suggestion as to 
the origin of the form, nor does the 
tower, either square or circular; nor 
does any form of civil or domestic 




310. Modern Temple at Benares. 


3x1. Diagram Plan of Hindu Temple. 


architecture. It does not seem to be derived from any of these, 
and, whether we consider it as beautiful or otherwise, it seems 
certainly to have been invented principally at least for aesthetic 
purposes, and to have retained that impress from the earliest 
till the present day. 

The plan of a northern temple is always a square internally, 
and generally the same form is retained in the exterior; but 
very rarely, if ever, without some addition. In some instances 
it is only a thin parallel projection, as at A in the diagram 


Chap, t SlKHARAS AND PLANS $t 

(No. 31 1). Sometimes it has two such slices added, as at B; 
but in the oldest examples these are only half the thickness 
shown here. From this they proceeded to three projections, 
as at C, the oldest examples being the thinnest In more 
modern times the thickness of the projections became equal 
to their distance from each other, as at D ; so that the temple 
became in plan practically a square, the sides of which were 
parallel to the diagonal of the original square or to the line 
E F G. Even, however, when this was the case, the cell always 
retained its original form and direction, and the entrance and 
windows kept their position on what had thus practically become 
the angles of the building. This is the case with the temple at 
Benares, shown in Woodcut No. 310, and generally also with 
the Jaina temples, and especially the case with the temple on 
the Takht-i-Sulaim&n in Kashmir. Although the depth and 
width of these offsets vary considerably even in the same design, 
the original square is never lost sight of ; the four central angles, 
as at F, being always larger and more strongly accentuated than 
the others, and their line is always carried through to the summit 
of the pyramid. 

It will be observed that by this process we have arrived at 
the same form or plan for a solid building that was attained by 
the arrangement of pillars described vol. i. page 317. In fact, 
the two forms were elaborated simultaneously, and were after* 
wards constantly used together. My impression is, that the 
pillared arrangement is the oldest, and led to the deepening of 
the additions to the solid square till the two became identical in 
plan. Whether this were so or not, it is one of the most 
distinguishing features of northern HindO architecture. 

In the very centre of India, at Amarakantak, near a place 
marked Ajmirgadh on the map, is a sacred tank, from which it 
is' said that the Sdn flows to the north, the Mah&nadl to Katak 
in the Bay of Bengal, and the Narbada to the Indian Ocean. 
All these rivers have their sources in the hill. The spot has 
always been held sacred, and is surrounded by temples, two 
or three -of them — as far as can be gathered from the imperfect 
accounts available — of considerable age.^ On the south and 
east of this hill extends the great and fertile table -land of 
Chhatttsgarh. This is now, and has always been, so far as 
our knowledge extends, one of the principal seats of the native 
tribes. If that country and the surrounding districts were 
carefully surveyed, we might And temples, some of w'hich would 
add very materially to our knowledge of the history of this style.* 

^ Mr. Beglar in ‘ Archeological Survey i * Conf. Cousens, * Lists of Antiquaiian 
01 India Reports,’ vol. vii. pp. 227ff. and | Remains in the Central Pfoviaoes and 
plates 20^ 21; but the account and draw- Berar,’ Calcutta, 1897, which indictte 
mgs are very defective. some promising remain.s. 


CHAPTER II. 


ORISSA. 

CONTENTS. 

History — Temples at Bhuvane^war, Kanirak, Puri, J^jpur, and Katak. 


CHRONOLOGY. 

Anantavarman Chodaganga- Narasimhadeva I. . . cir, 1238-1264 

dcva . . . cir. 1078 Narasimhadeva II. . . ,, I 277 "* 30 S 

KamSrnava . . . 1144-Z155 Sulaimdn, King of Bengal 

Aniyanga Bhlmadeva II. . ,, 1190-1198 conquered Orissa . ,, 1568 

The two provinces of India, where the Indo- Aryan style can be 
studied with the greatest advantage, are Dh&rw&r on the west, 
and Orissa on the east coast. The former has the advantage of 
being mixed up with the Dravidian style; so as to admit of 
synonyms and contrasts that are singularly interesting, both 
from ap ethnological and historical point of view. In Orissa, on 
the contrary, the style is perfectly pure, being unmixed with any 
other, and thus forms one of the most compact and homogeneous 
architectural groups in India, and as such of more than usual 
interest, and it is consequently in this province that the style 
can be studied to the greatest advantage. 

One of the most marked and striking peculiarities of Orissan 
architecture is the distinct and almost absolute contrast it 
presents to the style of the Dravidian at the southern end of 
the peninsula. The curved outline of the towers or vimAnas 
has already been remarked upon, but, besides this, no Orissan 
towers present the smallest trace of any storeyed or even step- 
like arrangement, which is so universal further south, and the 
crowning member is never a dome, nor a reminiscence of one. 
Even more remarkable than this, is the fact that the Orissan 
style is almost entirely astylar. In some of the more modern 
examples, as for instance in the porches added to the temples 
at Bhuvane.rwar and Puri in the 12th and 14th centuries, we do 
find pillars, but it is probably correct to state that, among the 
100 or 150 original shrines at Bhuvanejwar, scarcely a pillar is 
to be found.^ This is the more remarkable because, within sight 

^ The Bhogamandapas of the Lingaraja, bat these mandapas are of later dates 

Jagannith and Yamervara temples have than the temples themselves, 
each four pillars supporting their roofs; 



Chap. II. 


ORISSA. 


93 


of that capital, the caves in the Udayagiri {ante, p. 13) are 
adorned with pillars to such an extent as to show that their 
forms must have been usual and well known in the province 
before any of the temples were constructed. When we recollect 
that no great temple in the south was considered complete 
without its hall of 1000 columns,” and many besides this had 
hundreds dispersed about the place, and used for every conceiv- 
able purpose, the contrast is more striking, and shows what a 
complete barrier the Chalukyas interposed between the two 
races on this side of India, though not on the other. As a rule, 
every Orissan temple consists of two apartments, similar in plan, 
as shown in the diagram (Woodcut No. 184).. The inner one is 
generally a cube, surmounted by a tower, here called Bar^-deul, 
or Dewal, corresponding with the vim^na of the south, and in it 
the image or images of the gods are enshrined ; in front of this 
is a porch or antar^la, called Jaga-mohan, generally square in 
plan or approaching it, and surmounted by a pyramidal roof of 
varying pitch. The peculiarities are illustrated in the diagram 
(Woodcut No. 184) just referred to, which purports to be an 
elevation of the celebrated Black Pagoda at Kan^rak. It is 
only, however, an eye-sketch, and cannot be depended upon for 
minute detail and correctness, but it is sufficient to explain the 
meaning of the text. Sometimes one or two more porches 
(mandapas) were added in front of this one, called the N&ta- 
mandir or dancing-hall — corresponding to the SabhS-mandapa in 
a Gujarat temple — and the Bhoga-mandir or refectory, but these, 
in almost every instance, are afterthoughts, and not parts of the 
original design. Be this as it may, in every instance in Orissa 
the tower with its porch forms the temple. If enclosed in a 
wall, they are always to be seen outside. There are gateways, 
it is true, but they are always subordinate, and there are none 
of those accretions of enclosures, and gopurams that form so 
marked a characteristic of the southern style. There generally 
are other shrines within the enclosures of the great temples, but 
they are always kept subordinate, and the temple itself towers 
over everything to even a greater extent than that at Tanjor 
(Woodcut No. 213), giving a unity and purpose to the whole 
design, so frequently wanting in the south. 

Other contrasts will come out as we proceed, but, in the 
meanwhile, few examples bring out more clearly the vast im- 
portance of ethnography as applied to architecture. That two 
peoples, inhabiting practically the same country, and worshipping 
the same gods under the guidance of the same Brahmanical 
priesthood, should have adopted and adhered to two such dis- 
similar styles for their sacred buildings, shows as clearly as 
anything can well do how much race has to do with these 



94 


NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 


matters, and how little we can understand the causes of such 
contrasts, unless we take affinities or differences of race into 
consideration. 


History. 

About eighty years ago Mr. Andrew Stirling published an 
‘ Account of Orissa proper or Cuttack/ giving a dynastic list of 
the rulers from B.C. 3101 to the beginning of last century, with 
dates and notable events of their reigns.^ This was drawn up 
from native records belonging to the temple of Jagann&th at 
Purt ; and, dismissing the early portions as manifestly fabulous, 
the record, from the accession of Yay^ti Ke^art towards the end 
of the Sth century, was accepted as tolerably trustworthy, and 
was revised and published with a fuller list of the names by Sir 
W. W. Hunter in his ‘ Orissa/ ^ But, like other native histories, 
it cannot stand examination, and must be discarded as worthless 

E revious to the 1 2th century, and very inaccurate even for the 
ist four or five centuries. Here, as elsewhere, we can hope for 
trustworthy historical information only from the steady pursuit 
of epigraphical research, which as yet has yielded but four or 
five names of a Somavam.fi or Lunar dynasty that ruled before 
the 1 2th century ; and their inscriptions are unfortunately dated 
only in regnal years, and must be relegated, on epigraphical 
grounds, to about the nth century.® We have thus, as yet, 
but little help from historical sources. It is true that the dates 
of two of its temples have been approximately ascertained. 
The great one at Bhuvanejwar is said to have been erected 
about A.D. 640— but possibly later— and that at Purt between 
AD. 1080 and 1 140, nearly the first and the last of the series. 
My impression is that in the later direction it can hardly be 
extended beyond the year 1260, but within these limits it scem^? 
possible to arrange the sequence oi all the temples in the 
province without much difficulty, and to ascertain their dates 
with some degree of approximate certainty. 

With the exception of the great temple of Jagannith at Puri, 
the buildings described in this chapter were mostly erected 

^ * Asiatic Researches,’ vol. xv. (1825), the iiew * Gazetteer of Pur!,’ chap. ii. 

; also * History of the Rdjas of ^ Among four successive rulers, of 

rissa, from the reign of R&ja Yudhistira. which we have inscriptions, tentatively 

Translated from the Vamr&valt,’ in * Jour, placed in the nth century, the third, 

Asiat. Soc. Bengal,’ vol. vi. (1837), pp. Yaydti Mah&-.Sivagupta, may possibly be 

756-766. the Yayfiti Kerar!, which the Vamiival! 

^ * Orissa’ (ed. 1872) vol. i. pp. I98f. makes the founder of the dynasty in 474* 
and vol. ii. pp. 183-191 ; also in Sewell’s 526, or 6ve centuries before his probable 
*Lbts of Inscriptions and Dynasties of date.— -Dr J. F. Fleet in *Epigraphia 
Southern India,* pp. 204-209. An out- Indica,* vol, iii. pp. 323-359. 
lihe of the history of Orissa is given in 



Chap. II. 


HISTORY. 


95 


before the commencement of the I2th century, when we find 
Anantavarman Chodagangadeva (1078-1142) of the Eastern 
Ganga dynasty recording that he replaced the fallen lord of 
Orissa in his kingdom.^ About this period the Ganga>vanra 
dynasty succeeded, the second of whom was the builder of the 
great Purl temple— or at least completed it — for its erection is 
ascribed to his father, Chodaganga, thirty years earlier. They 
were nominally 5 aivas, but patronised also the Vaishnavas, 
whilst the preceding dynasty seem to have been devoted 
5aivas. 

Owing to its remoteness froin the seats of Muhammadan 
power, Orissa almost entirely escaped the ravages which 
devastated the principal Hindu cities in the earlier and more 
intolerant age of their power. The first serious invasion of 
OrLssa was only made about 1510 by 'Al&u-d-DIn Hasain Sh&b, 
King of Bengal, whose army sacked Katak and plundered Purt, 
but was driven back ; and it was not till 1 567- 1568 that Sulaim&n 
Kh&n Karir&ni, the Afghan Viceroy of Bengal, finally defeated 
the Orissa king at J&jpur. Soon after it was annexed by Akbar, 
and after four more years of contests it became a province of 
his empire in 1 578, after which further outrages were hardly to 
be feared. 

At J&jpur the Muhammadans had already wreaked their 
vengeance on all that was Hindi! ; but elsewhere the monuments 
were left more nearly intact than any other group in the north 
of India. Neither at Bhuvaneswar nor at Purt or Kan&rak are 
marked traces of their violence. In later times the Orissa 
remains have suffered from the sordid proceedings of the Public 
Works Department, which destroyed the fort at Bclrb&ti and 
other public buildings, to mend roads or to save some money in 
erecting a lighthouse at False Point. Further injury has t^n 
done by the antiquarian zeal of the officers who removed some 
of the best statues of the R&jardnl temple,® and .by the vandals 
who pulled down the Navagraha sculpture from the Kan&rak 
temple. Lastly, and worst of all, by the Archaeological Survey, 
a few years ago, which caused the interior of the mandap of 
this famous monument to be completely filled up with stones 
and sand and so “ shut up for ever.” * 

Besides their immunity from the ordinary causes of destruc- 
tion of Hindi! buildings, the Orissa group Forms in itself one of 
the most complete and interesting in all India. The Khajur&ho 

^ Indian Antiquaiy,’ vol. xviii. p. 171; ’This was conceived to be the only 
*Jour. Asiat Soc. Bengal/ vol. Ixxii. way of preventing the roof from fiilling 
pp. loiff. in.— Mr. Marshall’s ‘Annual Report/ 

’ Rijendralll Mitra’s 'Antiquities of 1903-1904,* p. 48. 

Orissa,’ vol. ii. p. 90. 



NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 


group IS nearly as extensive and magnificent, but they were 
all erected within the limits of about a century, 950 to 1050,^ so 
that little sequence can be traced among them. There are also 
temples in the Kanarese districts more magnificent than any in 
Orissa, and extending through a long series of years ; but they 
are scattered over a wide extent of country, and are consequently 



ULm 






Ik a;',, 

/ - i _ 'I All • h II. 

t- :■ V. 


31J1. Temple of Parajur&raejwar. (From a Photograph.) 

varied by local peculiarities of style. It therefore requires more 
knowledge and experience to classify them than it does those in 
this province. Altogether there is not, perhaps, any group 
which, if properly investigated, would add more to our know- 
ledge of Indian architecture, and give it more precision, than 
the Bhuvanejwar temples.® 


1 Cunningham, * Archaeological Survey 
Reports/ vol. ii. p. 416 ; iff/ra, p. 141. 

> The late R&jendral&l Mitra, who was 
sent with the expedition organised by the 
Bengal Government in 1868 to survey the 
antiquities of Orissa, most unfortunately 
had no knowledge whatever of archi- 
tectnral surveying or draughtsmanship ; 
nor had he any acquaintance with Indian 
styles to guide him in determining the 


periods to which different buildings 
oelonged. Even his vaunted acquaint- 
ance with epigraphy was superficial and 
inexact ; and the two folio volumes he 
prepared at public expense, added little, 
if anything, to our knowledge. — 'Indian 
Antiquary/ vol. ix. pp. 1 13?. and 142!. ; 
Fergusson’^ ‘Archaeology in India,’ pp. 
48ff. 




Chat. II. 


HISTORY. 


91 

The oldest temple in the town of Bhuvanejwar is prob- 
ably that called Pararurimerwar (Woodcut No. 312), which, 
from the termination of the name, as well as the Linga in the 
cella, and subjects portrayed in the three principal niches of 
the tower, mark it as ^ ^aiva shrine. It may belong to the 
7th century, though it may be as late as the 8th. Its style 
is certainly different from the other early temples here, and 
more like what we find at other places outside the province. It 
is not large, being only 20 ft. square^ at its base; but its 
sculptures are cut with a delicacy seldom surpassed, and there 
is an appropriateness about the ornaments greater than is seen 
in most of the temples. 

The temple itself is apparently 42 ft. in height, and from the 
summit to the base it is covered with sculptures of the most 
elaborate character,* but still without detracting from the 
simplicity and vigour of its outline. 

If I am correct in assigning so early a date to the tower of 
this temple, it is evident that the porch must be a subsequent 
addition, because it fits badly to the tower. It may, however, 
be that if this is really the oldest temple of its class in Orissa, 
its design may be copied from a foreign example, and borrowed, 
with all its peculiarities, from a style practised elsewhere. Be 
that as it may, it is interesting as showing the mode by which 
light was sometimes introduced into the porches of these temples 
between the ends of the beams of the stone roof. As the sloping 
roofing • stones project considerably beyond the openings, a 
subdued light is introduced, without either the direct rays of the 
sun, or the rain being able to penetrate.* 

The temple of Mukterwar (Woodcut No. 313) is very similar 
in general design to that of Pararurim&rwar, but even richer and 
more varied in detail, and its porch partakes more of the regular 
Orissan type. It has no pillars internally, and the roof 
externally exhibits at least the germ of what we find in the 
porches of the great temple at Bhuvanerwar and the Black 
Pe^oda. Its dimensions are somewhat less than those of the 
last, temple described, but in its class it may be considered 
the gem df Orissan architecture.* 

^ This dimension is from Babu Rijen- roof of the mandapa was dismantled and 
dralfirs ‘ Orissa Antiquities,’ voL i. p. 41, rebuilt.”— ‘Archaeological Survey Annual 
but I don’t like it. [Judging from a Report, iqb2<03,’ p. 46. 
photograph — the estimated height being "This temple is surrounded by “a 
about 43 ft. — this dimension seems to be number of small shrines, and close to it 
at least 27 ft.] also stands the temple of Siddhervara, a 

G. Le Bon, * Les Monuments de larger structure. All the shrines are 
rinde,’ p. 70 and figs. 49, 5a inferior 'works of art, but nevertheless 

• This temple has of late been in the they have all been restored.” — Dr. T. 
hands of the official, and we learn that it • Bloch, idid, p. 46. No survey is 
“ has been thoroughly restored ; the whole mentioned as having been made. 



98 


NORTHERN OR INDaARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 


Besides these, there are several other temples which, from 
the style of their architecture, I would feel inclined to place as 



313. Temple of Muktejwar. (From a Photograph.) 


earlier than the great temple. One is known as S&ri Dewal, 
near the great temple, and another, a vety complete and 
beautiful example, is called Maitrejwar, which is almost a 
duplicate, on a small scale, of the great temple, except that it 





Chap. II. GREAT TEMPLE AT BHUVANE5WAR. 99 


has no repetition of itself on itself, 
almost all the ornaments on the 
fa9ades of Buddhist temples are 
repetitions of themselves; but the 
Hindiis do not seem to have adopt :.d 
this system so early, and the extent 
to which it is carried is generally a 
fair test of the age of Hindfl temples. 
In the great Pagoda there are 
eight copies of itself on each face, 
and in the R&jarAnt the system is 
carried so far as almost to obliterate 
the original form of the temple. 


Great Temple of Bhuvane 5 War. 

The great temple of Bhuvanerwar, 
known as the LingarAja, is one of 
the landmarks in the style. It is 
traditionally ascribed to a Lalatendra 
KesdLrtf who is said to have ruled 
in the 7th century ; though this is 
mere fable, the temple may tenta- 
tively be ascribed to about the 9th 
or loth century; but be this as it 
may, taking it all in all, it is perhaps 
the finest example of a purely Hindu 
temple in India. 

Though not a building of the 
largest class, the dimensions of this 
temple in plan are, so far as I can 
make out, far from contemptible. 
The whole length is about 210 ft, 
with a breadth trying from 60 ft. 
to 75 ft The original temple, how- 
ever, like almost all those in Orissa, 
consisted only of a vimSna, or Bara- 
dewal, and a porch or Jagamohan, 
shaded darker in the plan (Woodcut 
No. 314), and they extend only to 
160 ft. The N&ta- and Bhoga-man- 
daps, shaded lighter, were added 
possibly about the 12th century or 
even later. Though several temples 
have all these four apartments, so 


As above pointed out, 



314. Plan of Great Temple at Bhu- 
vanejwar. Compiled partly from 
Plan in Mbu R&jendral&l Mitra's 
work, but corrected from Photo- 
graphs. Scale 50 ft. to X in. 






lOO 


NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 


far as I can make out, none were originally erected with them. 
The true Orissan temple is like that represented in Woodcut 
No. 184, a building with two apartments only, and these astylar, 
or practically so : the pillars were only introduced in the com- 
paratively modern additions. 



3x5. View of Great or Lingarftja Temple, Bhuvanexwar. (From a Photograph.) 


The outline of this temple in elevation is not, at first sight, 



Chap. II. GREAT TEMPLE AT BHUVANE5WAR. loi 

pleasing to the European eye; but when once the eye is 
accustomed to it, it has a singularly solemn and pleasing aspect 
It is a solid, and would be a plain square tower, but for the 
slight curve at the top, which takes off the hardness of the 
outline and introduces pleasingly the circular crowning object 
(Woodcut No. 315). As compared with that at Tanjor (Wood- 
cut No. 213), it certainly is by far the finer design of the two. 
In plan the southern example is the larger, being 82 ft. square. 
This one is only about 66 ft. ^ from angle to angle, though it is 
75 ft. across the central projection. Their height is nearly the 
same, both of them being over 180 ft, but the upper part of the 
northern tower is so much more solid, that the cubic contents 
of the two are probably not very different Besides, however, 
greater beauty in form, the northern example excels the other 
immeasurably in the fact that it is wholly in stone from the 
base to the apex, and — what, unfortunately, no woodcut can 
show — every inch of the surface is covered with carving in the 
most elaborate manner. It is not only the divisions of the 
courses, the roll-mouldings on the angles, or the breaks on the 
face of the tower : these are sufficient to relieve its flatness, and 
with any other people they would be deemed sufficient; but 
every individual stone in the tower has a pattern carved upon it, 
not so as to break its outline, but sufficient to relieve any idea 
of monotony. It is, perhaps, not an exaggeration to say that 
if it would take a sum — say a lakh of rupees or pounds — to erect 
such a building as this, it would take three lakhs to carve it as 
this one is carved. Whether such an outlay is judicious or not, 
is another question. Most people would be of opinion that a 
building four times as large would produce a greater and more 
imposing architectural effect ; but this is not the way a Hindfl 
ever looked at the matter. Infinite labour bestowed on every 
detail was the mode in which he' thought he could render his 


' This and the dimensions in plan 
generally are taken froin a table in BSbu 
KSjendralal’s ‘Antiquities of Orissa,’ vol. 

i. p. 41. I am afraid they are only round 
numbers, but they suffice for comparison. 
They are certainly incorrect. In the table 
the tower is described as 66 ft. by 60, 
while all the photographs prove that it is 
undoubtedly square. In the plan (vol. 

ii. pi. 48) the sides are represented as 66 
by 54 ft. from angle to angle, and the 
internal dimensions are given in the table 
as 42 square. In the plan they are 44 by ' 
46, and approach so nearly to the exterior, 
that if the tower had been built, as repre- ’ 
sented in his plan, it would not have 
stood for an hour. In figure 314 the 


internal dimension is reduced to 40 ft. 

I with the larger external one of 65 ft. 

I The Bhoga-mandapa is said in the text 
(p, 72) to be 56 ft. square ; by scale it is 
03 by 70. The Ndta-mandir is said to be 
52 ft. square, and scales 58 by 61. The 
Jagamohan in the text is said to measure 
65 ft. by 45 ; on the plan it measures 70 
by 50. Making these and other adjust- 
ments from the plan, it reduces the total 
length to about 210 ft., instead of the 
290 of the plan. This is confirmed by 
Mr Atkinson’s plan (pi. xxviii.). In like 
manner the temple of Bhagavatl (pi. 
xlviii.) is represented as 160 ft. in length, 
while Mr. Atkinson makes it only no.-* 
‘ Archaeology in India,’ pp. 49, 50. 



103 


NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 


temple most worthy of the deity; and, whether he was right 
or wrong, the effect of the whole is certainly marvellously 
beautiful. It is not, however, in those parts of the building 

shown in the wood- 
cut that the greatest 
amount of carving or 
design was bestowed, 
but in the perpen- 
dicular parts seen 
from the courtyard 
(Woodcut No. 316). 
There the sculpture 
is of a very high order 
and great beauty of 
design. This, how- 
ever, ought not to 
surprise us when we 
recollect that at 
Amar&vatt, on the 
banks of the Krishna, 
not far from the 
southern boundary of 
this kingdom, there 
stood a temple more 
delicate and elaborate 
in its carvings than 
any other building 
in India, ^ and that 
this temple had been 
finished probably 
eight centuries before 
this one was erected ; 
andthoughthe history 
of art in India is now written in decay, its growth and vitality 
had, in earlier times, been vigorous. 

Attached to the Jagamohan of this temple is a Nita-mandir, 
or dancing-hall, whose date is, traditionally assigned to about 
the year 1100: but this is perhaps too early, as there are 
inscriptions of the 12th and 13th centuries on the doorway of 
the temple porch, and they are probably earlier than the NSta- 
mandir. But even then it enables us to measure the extent 
of this decay with some degree of certainty. It is elegant, 
of course, for art had not yet perished among the Hindis, 

^ * Tree and Serpent Worship,’ plates 48-98 ; * Amardvatl and Jaggayyapeta 
Buddhist St^ipas’ (1887). 



* 316. Lower part of Great Tower at Bhuvane.rwar. 
{From a Photograph.) 



Chap. II. GREAT TEMPLE AT BHUVANE^RTAR. 


103 


but it differs from the style of the porch to which it is 
attached more than the leanest example of TudcM* art differs 
from the vigour and grace of the buildings of the early 
Edwards. All that power of expression is gone which enabled 
the early architects to make small things look gigantic from 
the exuberance of labour bestowed upon them. A glance at 
the N&ta-mandir is sufficient for the mastery of its details. 
A week’s study of the Jagamohan would every hour reveal 
new beauties. 

The last woodcut may convey some idea of the extent to 
which the older parts were elaborated : but even the photog^ph 
hardly enables any one not familiar with the style to real^ 
how exquisite the combination of solidity of mass with exuber- 
ance of ornament really is. 

During the five centuries which elapsed between the 
erection of these two porches, Bhuvanerwar was adorned with 
some hundreds of temples, some dozen of 
which have been photographed, but hardly 
in sufficient detail to enable the student to 
classify them according to their dates.' On 
the spot it probably would be easy for any 
one trained to this class of study, and it 
would be a great gain if it were done. 

The group nearest in richness and interest is 
that at Khajur&ho, mentioned above (p. 49) ; 
but that group belongs to an age just sub- 
sequent ‘ to that of the Bhuvanerwar group, 
and only enables us to see that some of 
the most elaborate of the Katak temples 
may extend to the year 1000 or thereabouts, by BAbu RAjeni^aUi 
It is to this date that I would ascribe the 
erection of the R&jar&nt temple. The names 50 to i in.' 
of the more notable, of which I have photo- 
graphs, with their approximate dates, are given in the list at 
the end of this chapter; but I refrain from burdening the 
text with their names, as I despair, by any reasonable number 
of woodcuts, of illustrating their marvellous details in anything 
like a satisfactory manner. 

The R&jar&nt temple, as will be seen from the woodcut 
(No. 317), is small; but the plan is arranged so as to give 
great variety and play of light and shade, and as the details 



^ Photographs have enabled me to 
supply to some extent the deficiency of 
my local knowledge; but unless photo- 
graphs are taken by a scientific man for 


scientific purposes, they do not supply the 
place of local experience ; but a full archi** 
tectural survey also is much desiderated. 
^ Cunningham’s ^Reports,’ vol. ii. p. 416. 



104 


NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 


are of the most exquisite beauty, it is one of the gems 
of Orissan art.^ The following woodcut (No. 318), without 
attempting to illustrate the art, is quoted as characteristic 
of the emblems of the period. Below the pillar are three 
kneeKng elephants, over which domineer three lions or leogriffs. 

Above this a Ndgnt, or 
female N&ga, with her 
seven - headed snake - 
hood, adorns the upper 
part of the pillar. They 
are to be found, gener- 
ally in great numbers, in 
almost all the temples of 
the province. Over the 
doorway are the Nava- 
graha, or nine planets, 
which are almost more 
universal at the Linga- 
rdja temple. 

Throughout the pro- 
vince, from the time we 
first meet it, about the 
yth century, if so early, 
till it dies out about 
A.D. 1300, the style 
seems to be singularly 
uniform in its features, 
and it requires consider- 
318. Do<^^in ^^Ttemple. able familiarity with it 

to detect its gradual 
Notwithstanding this, it is easy to 


- 


f 

V 

: 

. 

, ' 

1 %' 

- V*/'' 

‘ ^ 



■M' 






progress towards decay. 


^ Both the temples ot Muktejvara and 
Rftjarfint have been restored by Dr. 
Bloch, the Archseological surveyor, who 
gives photographs of them *' before, and 
after repairs,'* out from so veiy dHferent 
points of view, that it is not clear what 
IS the extent of these repairs; — but in 
the Reports, this method of photograph- 
ing from different points ** before and 
after” meddling with the buildings, is 
remarkably frrauent. No mention seems 
to be made ot securing correct plans 
of the temples, which might readily have 
been made whilst the works were going 
on. The work done is thus described : 
**The temples generally were fairly intact, 
but a number 0? stones bad become either 
loose or unsafe, in the roof of the man- 


dapa and the upper parts of the spire. 
These had to be dismantled and built up 
again, using as far as possible the ancient 
materials. Carvings, when broken and 
lost, were replaced by new ones, and 
the work of the modern stonemason 
does not fall much behind the old work, 
except that modern restorations of 
human or animal figures are less grace- 
ful than their older models. Only such 
carvings have been replaced by new ones 
of which the original pattern was avail- 
able.** — ' Archseol. Survey Annual Report, 
1902-63,* pp. 45-46. It is pitiable to 
think of the barbarity of 20th century 
imitations, or supposed — but very inferior 
^imitations, being inserted in these vener- 
able structures. 



Chap. II. 


KANARAK. 


los 

perceive that there are two styles of architecture in Orissa, 
which ran side by side with one another during the whole course. 
The first is represented by the temples of Paramrflmexwar and 
Mukterwar (Woodcuts No. 312, 313); the second by the great 
temple (Woodcut No. 315). They are not ant^onistic, but 
sister styles, and seem certainly to have had at least partially 
different origins. We can find affinities with that of the 
Mukterwar group in Dhirw&r and most parts of northern 
India : but I know of nothing exactly like the great temple any- 
where else. It seems to be quite indigenous, and if not the most 
beautiful, it is the simplest and most majestic of the Indo-Aiyan 
styles. And I cannot help suspecting a wooden origin for it — 
the courses look so much more like carved logs of wood laid one 
upon another than courses of masonry, and the mode and extent 
to which they are carved certainly savours of the same material. 
There is a mosque built of Deodar pine in Kashmir, to be referred 
to thereafter, which certainly seems to favour this idea; but 
till we find some older temples than any yet discovered in Orissa 
this must remain in doubt. Meanwhile, it may be well to point 
out that the majority of the older temples in Orissa follow the 
type of the great temple, and the rest that of Paramrtmxwar ; but 
the two get confounded together in' the 9th and loth centuries, 
and are mixed together into what may almost be called a new 
style in the Rdjar&n! and temples of the nth and 12th centuries. 

KanArak. 

With, perhaps, the single exception of the temple of 
Jagann&th at Purl, there is no temple in India better known, 
and about which more has been written than the so-called 
Black Pagoda at Kandrak, 19 miles north-east from Purl; nor 
is there any one whose date and dedication is better known, 
since the literature on the subject can here be depended 
upon. Stirling’s statement that the present edifice was built by 
the R&ja Narasingh-deva I., who ruled from about 1238 to 1264, 
is supported by copperplate inscriptions.' Complete as this 
evidence appears, one is almost tempted to question it, for the 
simple reason that it seems improbable — after the erection of 
so inferior a specimen of the art as the temple of Purl {cir. AJJ. 
1 100) appears to be — the style could have reverted to anything so 
beautiful as this. In general design and detail it is so similar 
to the Jagamohan of the great temple at Bhuvane.nvar that at 
first sight I should be inclined to place it in the same century ; 

^ ‘Asiatic Researches/ vol. xv. p. R&jendralfil Mitra, ascribed it to Nara- 
327; and ‘Journal Asiatic Society of singha II., who began to reip:n, a.d. 
Bengal/ vol. Ixxii. (1903), part i. p. 124. 1278. ‘ Antiq. of Orissa/ vol. ii. p. 156. 



io« NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 

still the details of the tower exhibit a progress towards modem 
forms which is unmistakable.^ Abul razl after describing the 
temple with considerable detail and circumstantiality and 
ascribing it to R&ja Narasingh - deva I., adds that “it is said 
to be a work of 730 years’ antiquity.”* In other words, it 
was erected about A.D. 860, or just about 400 years before 
Narasingh’s date which must arise from an error in the hundreds 
figure. Narasingh-deva must, however, have employed architects 
of very different tastes and abilities to those engaged a century 
earlier in erecting the Purf temple. 

Another point of interest connected with this temple is, 
that all authors, apparently following Abul Fazl, agree that it 
was, like the temple of M&rtind, in Kashmir {ante, vol. i., p. 259), 
dedicated to the sun.* Sun-worship, we know, was prevalent 
in various parts of India, .previous to the 12th century, but it 
seems to have become merged in the Vishnu cult — SQrya- 
Nftr&yana being regarded as a form of Vishnu. In the west 
of India there are remains of quite a number of sun-temples 
of about the eleventh century,* and probably others will be found 
in Central India and elsewhere, when looked for. 

This temple differs in no respect from other temples of 
Vishnu found in Orissa. The architectural forms are identical ; 
they are adorned with the same symbols. The Navagraha, or 
nine planetary divinities, adorned the lintel of this as of all 
the templet 'of the district. The seven-headed serpent-forms 
are found on every temple, from the great one at Bhuvanerwar 
to this one, and it is only distinguishable from those of 5 iva 
by the obscenities that disfigure a part of its sculptures. This 
is, unfortunately, only too common a characteristic of Vaishnava 
temples all over India, but is not frequent in 5 aiva temples. A 
detached mandap that stood in front of it, occupying a correspond- 
ing place to that at MudherS, and the fine stambha were removed 
to Purl, in the i8th century, by the MarSthfls ; a corner of the 
rikhara was still standing in 1839, but within the next thirty 
years Iiad disappeared ; and the great lintel over the entrance 
to the principal hall, carved with the Navagraha, with other 
parts about the doorway had fallen, or were removed, and 
an abortive attempt was made to carry the lintel to Calcutta. 

Architecturally, the great beauty of this temple arises from 

^ When 1 visited Orissa in 1S37 and somewhat over 730 yeaisagoRdjaNarsinc 
sketched this temple, a great part of the Deo completed this stupendous fabric and 
tower was still standing. See * Pictur- left this mighty memorial to posterity.” 
esque Illustrations of Indian Architecture/ ^ Arka is a name of the sun as the 

plate iii. It has since fallen entirely. **lightner”; the place is mentioned as 

^ * Ayeen Akbery/ Gladwin’s transla- Arka-kshetra or Padma-kshetia. 
tion, vol. ii. p. 16. farrctt’s version (vol. * ‘Archccological Survey of Western 
ii. pp. 128-129) reads “ It is said that I India/ vol. ix. pp. 73, 74. 



Chap. II. 


KANARAK. 


107 


the form of the design of the roof of the Jagamohan, or porch — 
the only part now remaining. Both in dimensions And detail, 
it is extremely like that of the great temple at Bhtivanefwar, 
but it^ is here divided into three storeys instead of two, which 
is an immense improvement, and it rises at a more agreeable 
angle. The first and second storeys consist of six cornices 
each, the third of five only, as shown in the diagram Woodcut 
No. 184. The two lower ones are carved with infinite beauty 
and variety on all their twelve faces, and the antefixae at the 
angles and breaks are used with an elegance and judgment 
a true Yayana could hardly have surpassed. There is, so far 
as I know, no roof in India where the same play of light 
and shade is obtained with an equal amount of richness and 
constructive propriety as in this instance, nor one that sits so 
gracefully on the base that supports it. 

Internally, the chamber is singularly plain, but presents 
some constructive peculiarities worthy of attention. On the 
floor, it is about 40 ft square, and the walls rise plain to about 
the same height. Here it begins to bracket inwards, till it 
contracts to about 20 ft, where it was ceiled with a flat stone 
roof, supported by wrought-iron beams — Stirling says nine, 
nearly i ft square by 12 ft to 18 ft long.^ My measurements 
made the section less — 8 in. to 9 in., but the length greater, 23 
ft; and BfLbu RAjendralSl points out that one, 21 ft long, has 
a square section of 8 in. at the end, but a depth of II in. in the 
centre,^ showing a knowledge of the properties and strength of 
the material that would be remarkable, were it not that they 
seem to be formed of blocks of short lengths, 3 or 4 in. square, 
built together, like bricks, and then covered with molten metal. 
The iron pillar at Delhi (Woodcut No. 373) is a more remark- 
able example than this, and no satisfactory explanation has yet 
been given as to the mode in which it was manufactured, — 
though it may possibly have been by a similar method. Its 
object, however, is plain, while the employment of these beams 
here is a mystery. They were not wanted for strength, as the 
building is still firm after they have fallen, and so expensive 
a false ceiling was not wanted architecturally to roof so plain a 
chamber.^ It seems to be only another instance of that p;^)- 
fusion of labour which the Hindus loved to lavish on the 
temples of their gods. 

^ ‘ Asiatic Researches,’ vol. xv. p. 330. * See ante^ p. 95. The present survey 

^ These discrepancies arose from the I furnishes no information, nor seems to 
fact that the beams lay on the floor buried | have made any architectural drawings of 
under the ruins of the stone roof they the structural arrangements and details 
once supported, and it was extremely | of the interior before burying it from all 
difficult to get at them so as to obtain | future examination, 
correct measurements. 



leS NORTHERN OR INDaARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 

Purl 

When from the old capital we turn to Purt, we find a state 
of affairs more altered than might be expected at the date to 
which the celebrated temple there belongs. The Somavan^a 
dynasty with their 5 aiva worship, had been superseded about 
1078 by the Gangavama, who were nominally much devoted 
to the service of Vishnu ; and they set to work at once to 
signalise their triumph by erecting thetemple to Jagann&th, 
which has since acquired such a world-wide celebrity. Purt 



Scalv 200 f ^ to the Ineh. 

3x9. Plan of Temple of Jagannilth at Purl. (From a Plan by R. P. Mukerji.) 

holds for the Vaishnava cult, the like rank as Benares or KfLri 
does for the 5 aiva, or Brind&ban (Mathurft) for the worship of 
Krishna. 

How this great fane came to be raised by the new sovereign 
Anantavarma-Chodagangadeva in a style so inferior to those 
of the previous dynasty must be matter of conjecture. As fresh 
ccmquerors, the Gangas might not have accumulated wealth ; and, 
moreover, they would almost certainly employ architects of 
their own race who were already known to them. These, 





Chap. II. 


PURI. 


109 


coming from the Dekhan, would naturally adopt the leading 
features of the temples of their native province in preference 
even to the best traits of the earlier structures. The style 
would thus be an intrusion breaking in upon the Orissan style. 
Even Stirling, who was no captious critic, remarks that it seems 
unaccountable, in ah age when the architects obviously possessed 
some taste and skill, and were in most cases particularly lavish 
in the use of sculptural ornament, so little pains should have 
been taken with the decoration and finishing of this sacred and 
stupendous edifice.^ It is not in the detail — which, however, is 
seriously obscured by the plasterings applied during the last 
two or three centuries, — but the outline, the proportions, and 
arrangements of the temple, show that the art in this province 
had received a downward impetus at the time. 

As will be seen from the annexed plan* (Woodcut No. 319), 
this temple has a double enclosure, a thing otherwise unknown 
in the north. Externally it measures 670 ft tw 640 ft, and is 
surrounded by a wall 20 ft to 30 ft high, with four gates. The 
inner enclosure measures 420 ft by 315 ft, and is enclosed by a 
double wall with four openings. Within this last stands the 
Bari-Dewal, A, measuring 80 ft. across the centre, or 5 ft. more 
than the great temple at Bhuvane^ar; with its porch or 
Jagamohan, B, it measures 1 55 ft east and west, while the great 
tower rises to a height of 192 ft’ Beyond this two other 
porches were afterwards added, the N&ta-mandir, C, and Bhoga* 
mandir, D, making the whole length of the temple about 300 
ft., or as nearly as may be the same as that at Bhuvanerwar. 
Besides this there are, as in all great Hindi! temples, numberless 
smaller shrines within the two enclosures, but, as in all instances 
in the north, they are kept subordinate to the principal one, 
which here towers supreme over all. 

Except in its double enclosure, and a certain irregularity of 
plan, this temple does not differ materially in arrangement from 
the g^eat ones at Bhuvanerwar and elsewhere ; but besides the 
apparent want of detail already remarked upon, the outline 
of its vimina is quite devoid either of that solemn solidity of 
the earlier examples, or the grace that characterised those sub> 
sequently erected ; and when we add to this that whitewash and 
paint have done their worst to add vulgarity to forms already 
sufficiently ungraceful, it will easily be understood that this, the 
most famous, is also the most disappointing of northern HindO 

’ ‘ Asiatic Researches,’ vol. xv. p. sfid Mukeqi, and is the onl^ plan I erer 
315. found done ty a native sufficiently correct 

* The plan is reduced from one to a to be used, except as a diagram, m after 
scale of 40 ft. to I inch, made by an serious doctoring, 
intelligent native assistant to the Public * Hunter, ' Orissa,’ vol. i. p. isS. 
Works Department, named RMhira Fra* 



110 NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE. BookVI. 

temples.^ As may be seen from the following illustration (Wood- 
cat No. 320 ), the parts are so nearly the same as those found in 



3aa View of Tower of Temple of Jagannftth. (From a Photograph. ) 

all the older temples at Bhuvan&rwar, that the difference could 


^ News reached this country, about 
thirty-two years ago^ of a curious accident 
having happened in this temple. Just 
after the gods bad been removed ftom 
their Sinhftsan to take their annual 
excursion to the Gundkhft-^ar, some 
stones of the roof fell in, and would have 
killed any attendants, and smashed the 
gods had they not fortunately all been 
absent. Assuming the intenor of the 
Barl*Dewal to be as re^esented (Wood- 
cut No. 184), it is not easy to see how 


this could have happened. But in the 
same woodcut the porch or Jagamohan 
of the Kan&rak p^oda is represented 
with a flat false roof, which had fallen. 
That roof, however, was formed of stone 
laid on iron beams, and looked as if it 
could only have been shaken down by 
an. earthquake. I have little doubt that 
a similar fiUse roof was formed some 
way up the tower over the altar at Pur^ 
but ftwmed probably of stokie laid on 
wooden beams, and either decay or the 



Chap. II. 


Ill 


JAJPUR AND KATAK. 

hardly be expressed in words ; even the woodcut, however, is 
sufficient to show how changed they are in effect, but the build- 
ing itself should be seen fully to appreciate the degradation in 
style. 

JAjpur and Katak. 

J^jpur, on the Baitaranf, was one of the old capitals of 
the province, and even now contains temples which, from the 
squareness of their forms, may be old, 
but, if so, they have been so com- 
pletely disguised by a thick coating 
of plaster, that their carvings are 
entirely obliterated, and there is 
nothing by which their age can be 
determined. The place was the scene 
of the struggle in the i6th century 
between the MusalmAns and Hindtis 
for the mastery of the province ; 
and, under SulaimAn and his Afghan 
soldiers, it was reduced to ruins. 

Like Anhilapur in Gujarat, the ruined 
structures became a quarry for build- 
ing materials, and the handsome 
mosque built by Nawdb Abu Nasir 
Kh^n in 1681 was raised out of the 
ancient HindCi remains.^ There is 
one pillar, however, still standing, 
which deserves to be illustrated as 
one of the most pleasing examples of 
its class in India (Woodcut No. 321). 

Its proportions are beautiful, and its 
details in excellent taste ; but the 
mouldings of the base, which are 
those on which the Hindus were 
accustomed to lavish the utmost care,. ..... 

have, unfortunately, been destroyed.® 3 “'- ’(Froma'photo^^.) 
Originally it is said to have supported 

a figure of Garuda — the VAhana of Vishnu — and a figure is 

white ants having destroyed the timber, pp. 265-273 ; or his ‘ Statistical Accoumt 
the stones have fallen as narrated. of Bengal,’ vol. xviii. pp. 85-89. He adds 

A similar roof so supported on wooden that the Public Works officers tore down 
beams still exists in the structural temple *Uhe last remnants of the ancient palace, 
on the shore at Miimallapuram, and, I and built bridges along the Trunk Road 
have no doubt, elsewhere, but it is almost with the stones.” 
impossible to get access to these cells ‘ The shaft is a chlorite monolith 29 ft. 
when the gods are at home, and the 9 in. in height, standing on a base of 
places are so dark it is equally impossible three plinths, 7 ft. in height. * Proceed- 
lo see, except when in rians, how they ings As. Soc. Bengal, 1872,’ part i. at 
were roofed. P* : Workman's ‘ Through Town and 

* For an .account of T&jpur antiquities. Jungle,’ pp. 2i8f. 
see Sir W. W. Hunter's ‘Orissji,’ vol. i. 




IIS 


NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 


pointed out as the identical one. It may be so, and if it is 
the case, the pillar is of the loth or nth century. This also 
seems to be the age of sonje remarkable pieces of sculpture 
which were discovered some years ago on the brink of the river, 
where they had apparently been thrown down by Muhammadan 
bigotiy.^ Th^ are in quite a different style from anything at 
Bhuvanerwar or Kan&rak, and probably more ancient than 
anything of the same kind at those places. 

Katak, according to tradition, became the capital of the 
cpuntry in A.D. 989-1006, when a certain Markat Kej’arl is said 
to have built a stone rev8tement to protect the site from 
encroachment of the river.* It too, however, has suffered, first 
from the intolerant bigotry of the Moslim, and afterwards from 
the stolid indifference of the British rulers,* so that very little 
remains. But for this the great palace of Makund Deo, the 
contemporary of Akbar, might still remain to us in such a 
state at least as to be intelligible. Abul Fazl’s description of 
this palace, however, has been misunderstood by the trans- 
lators, who have represented it as “ consisting of nine storeys,” 
instead of nine courts or enclosures. “ The first enclosure was 
for elephants, camels, and horses; the second for artillery and 
military stores where also were quarters for the guards and 
other attendants; the third was occupied by porters and 
watchman ; the fourth was appropriated for the several 
artificers; the kitchens made the fifth range; the sixth con- 
tained the Rija’s public apartments; the seventh was for the 
transaction of private business; the eighth was where the 
women resided ; and the ninth was the R&ja’s sleeping apart- 
ment” “To the south," he adds, “of this palace is a very 
ancient Hindfi temple.”^ 

As Orissa at the period when this was written was practically 
a part of Akbar’s kingdom, there seems little doubt that Abul 
Fazl’s description was furnished by some one who knew the 
place. 

Although it thus consequently happens that we have no 
more means of ascertaining what the civil edifices of the Indo- 
Aryans of Orissa were like, than we have of those of the con- 
temporary Dravidians, there is a group of engineering objects 
which throw some light on the arts of the period. As has been 


^ Th^ were of more than life size and 
represented three of the Miitris. 

• ‘ Asiatic Researches/ vol. xv. p. 367. 

• Ibid, p. 335 ; Hunter’s ‘ Orissa/ vol. 
i. tK 266. 

• * Ayeen Akbery, * Gladwin’s trans- 
lation, vol. ii. p. 13, and Jarrett’s, vol. 


ii. p. 127. The word ishiy&na nests/’ 
was rendered “storeys.” W. Bruton, 
who' visited Katak m 1633, makes it 
plain that "enclosures” or "courts” 
are meant. — * News from the East Indies’ 
in Osborne’s ’ Collection of Voyages and 
Travels/ 1745, PP* 271-272, 275. 







DOME IN VIMALA’S TEMPLE, MOUNT ABU 







INTERIOR OF TEJAHPALA’S TEMPLE AT MOUNT AbO 




rAnpur chaumukh temple, general view of, from s.e 




KIRTTl-STAMBHA AT 
VADNAGAR 





SINNAR ; TEMPLE OF GONDESVARA, FROM THE SOUTH 




amaranAth saiva temple, near kalyAn 








’ALAI gateway at old DELHI 






Chap. II. 


JAJPUR AND KATAK. 113 

frequently stated above, the Hindis hate an arch, and never will 
use it except under compulsion. The Muhammadans tai^ht 
them to get over their prejudices and employ the arch in their 
civil buildings in later times, but to the present day they avoid 
it in their temples in so far as it is possible to do so. In Orissa, 
however, in the 13th century, they built numerous bridges in 
various parts of the province, but never employed a true arch in 
any of them. The Athara-nalft bridge at Purt has been drawn 








Hmdtt Bridge at Jftjpur. (From a Photograph.) 


and described by Stirling, and is the finest in the province 
of those still in use. He ascribes its construction to Kabir 
Narsingh-deva II., about 1280 ; Rajendralal Mitra placed it two 
centuries earlier.^ Between the abutments it is 278 ft, long, with 
nineteen spans of 7 to 16 ft. wide, and with a roadway 38 ft. 
wide. That shown in the above woodcut (No. 322) is at 
JAjpur and is probably older, and certainly more picturesque, 
though constructed on the same identical plan. It may be 
unscientific, but many of these old bridges are standing and 

> From the Purt temple annals.— ‘Antiquities of Orissa,’ vol. ii. p. iia. Neither 
date has satisfactory authority. 




II4 NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 

in use while many of those we have constructed out of the 
ruins of the temples and palaces have been swept away as if 
a curse were upon them. 

Before leaving these Orissa temples mention may be made 
of three at Mukhalingam, in Ganj&m district, a place of 
pilgrimage adjoining the town of Nagarakatakam. This was 
the site of Kalinganagara, the old capital of the eastern Ganga 
dynasty of Kalinga before, and for some time after, their 
conquest of Orissa in the nth century.^ The place is 
described as a wilderness of ruins, and the largest and most 
entire of the temples consists of a shrine and mandap with 
two rows of three plain pillars in each* supporting the roof 
Outside, this roof is in the Orissa form, somewhat flat and 
with three finials in line across it. The shrine is surmounted 
by a tower or .rikhara of numerous thin moulded courses, 
crowned by a double amalariU with domed apex and small 
finial. The doorway, on the east, is deeply recessed and has 
two broad frames round the entrance — the inner sunk con- 
siderably within the outer — and both richly carved on their 
faces and lintels with floral patterns. This is flanked by square 
jambs sculptured on the front with figures in compartments 
and supporting a projecting lintel. Projecting still more on 
each side is a richly carved pilaster with capitals of the Gupta 
type, supporting an upper lintel crowded'with figures. 

SmaHer temples occupy the corners of the court, which is 
enclosed by a wall, and has entrances on the east and south 
sides. The gateway in front of the temple has, like Orissan 
porches, a stepped roof with ieogrifls over it. The entry, like 
that of the mandap, is considerably recessed, the inner jambs 
and three lintels being elaborately carved. 

Of the Bh!me.rvara temple only the shrine and mandap 
remain, and are of the general style of the Mukhalingervara 
just described. When its inscriptions have been fully examined, 
some definite clue may be found to determine its date, which 
may perhaps be of the iith century. But the finest of 
the group has been the Somervar temple, of which only the 
.rikhara remains. It resembles in its proportions and variety 
of sculptures the Para^uramerwar temple at Bhuvanerwar. 
The carving round the three niches on each face are exceed- 
ingly elaborate and interesting. But until we have the fuller 
illustrations of a survey or some epigraphical guidance, we may 


' Na^rakatakam is on the Vanua- | Parli-Kimedi estate, 
dhard river, in Lat. 1 8® 54' N., long 84® * These pillars and the walls Iwar 

3' E., about 20 miles N.N.W, from the inscriptions, some of which are said to 
mddern Kalingapatam, and within the I go back to the loth century. 



Chap. IT. 


CONCLUSION. 


”5 

assume that it belongs to the later part of the nth or to the 
1 2th century.^ 

Conclusion. 

The above may be considered as a somewhat meagre account 
of one of the most complete and interesting styles of Indian 
architecture. It would, however, be impossible to do it justice 
without an amount of illustration incompatible with the scope 
of this work, and with details drawn on a larger scale than its 
pages admit of.* 

An attempted classification, though merely tentative, has on 
several occasions been made in order to attract attention to the 
subject, in hopes that some one with opportunities and know; 
ledge might examine and revise it. With only such photographs 
as are available to depend upon, we can come to no satisfactory 
conclusions : at best they give only a partial, literally one-sided 
view of a building, and to ascertain its age^ we ought to be able 
to look all round it, and make ourselves familiar with its locality 
and surroundings. The thing will not be satisfactorily done till 
some one visits Orissa who has sufficient knowledge of the 
principles of archaeology to arrange the temples in a chrono- 
metric scale ; and this should not be difficult, the buildings are 
so uniform in character, and their architects expressed so simply 
and unaffectedly the feelings and art of their age. 

A good monograph of the Orissan style would convey a 
more correct idea of what Indian art really is than a similar 
account of any other style we are acquainted with in India. 
From the erection of the temples of Parajuramejwar and 
others, perhaps in the 7th century, to that of Jagann&th at 
Puri, A.D. 1 100, the style steadily progresses without admixture 
of foreign elements, while the examples are so numerous that 
one might be found for every fifty years of the period, and we 
might thus have a chronometric scale of Hindu art during 
these centuries that would be invaluable for application to 
other places or styles. It is also in Orissa and Kalinga, if 
anywhere, that we may hope to find the incunabula that will 
explain much that is now mysterious in the forms of the 
temples and the origin of many parts of their ornamentation. 

1 The editor is indebted to liabu deficiency of the first draft of this outline ; 
Monmohan Chakravarii, B.A., for valu- but this expectation \ias not realised by 
able information bearing on the contents its publication in 1880. With a moderate 
of this chapter and of that on the Orissa knowledge of the science of archaeology 
caves, as also for the use of photographs and accuracy of observation it would not 
and notes on these temples which have have been very difficult to arrange the 
formed the basis of the above account. temples in some sort of approximate 
® Thirty years ago it w'as hoped that sequence determined. V)y careful study of 
Rajendralal Mitra‘s work would, to the style. Nor has much information in 
some extent at least, have supplied the this direction been added since. 



ii6 


NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 


It is not only, however, that many technical questions will 
be answered when any competent person undertakes a thcnough 
examination of the ruins, but they will afford a picture of the 
civilisation and of the arts and religion of an Indian community 
during seven centuries of isolation ffom external influences, such 
as can hardly be obtained from any other source. So far as we 
at present know, it is a singularly pleasing picture, and one that 
will well repay any pains that may be taken to present it to the 
English public in a complete and intelligible form. 

Tentative List of Dates of the Principal Orissan Temples.* 

DATES. 

Parajuramejwar, N.W. from Muktejwar. 

5ijirejwar. 

650-900 ' Kapilini. 

Uttarcjwar. 

Some.rvar at Mukhalingam. 

^Siri Deula. 

Muktejwar, S. from Siddhejwar 

Lingar^j, Tribhuvanej’war or Bhuvanejwar Great Temple. 
Kedirejwar, S. from Muktejwar. 

Siddhejwar, 50 yards N. from Muktejwar. 

900-1000 . J Bhagavatt. 

Somejvar, 250 yards N. from the Great Temple. 
Brahmejwar. 

Mukhalingejwar. 

Viraji and Var^handth at J^jpur. 

I MArkandeJwar at Pun. 

^Nakejwar. 

Bbiskarerwar. 

nth century . . Rdjar^ni, 300 yards N.E. from Muktejwar. 

Chitrakarni. 

Kapilejwar. 

'Ramejwar. 

Yamejwar. 

1 2th century . > Maitrejwar. 

Great Temple of Jaganndth at Puri. 

Meghejwar. 

' Visudeva, on S.E. of the VindusAgara tank. 

Kanarak Sun Temple. 

13th century . ■ N«^ta Mandap of Lingaraja temple. 

Vishnu temple at MAdab, in Katak district. 

.Gopindth at Remund. 

The object of this, or any chronological classification of 
such a series of temples, is to bring us nearer a solution of 
one of the most obscure problems that perplex the student 
of Indian architecture. 

1 This list must not be regarded as in planned in the way the Dutch Archseo- 
any sense authoritative ; rather it is sub- logical Survey of Java does its work, it 
mitted for revision on larger knowledge, would be possible to arrange definitely 
Were these temples photographed and the Orissa temples. 



CHAPTER III. 


WESTERN INDIA. 

CONTENTS. 

Dhirwir — Brahmanical Rock-cut Temples, at Eluri, Biddmi, 
Elephanta, Dhamnir, and Poona. 


DhArwAr 

If the province of Orissa is interesting from the completeness 
and uniformity of its style of Indo-Aryan architecture, that 
of DhArw^r, or, more correctly speaking of Maharashtra, is 
almost equally so from exactly the opposite conditions. In 
the western province, the Dravidian style struggles with the 
northern for supremacy during all the earlier stages of their 
growth, and the mode in which the one influenced the other 
will be one of the most interesting and instructive lessons we 
can learn from their study, when the materials are available 
for a thorough investigation of the architectural history of 
this province. In magnificence, however, the western can never 
pretend to rival the eastern province. There are more and 
far finer buildings in the one city of Bhuvanejwar alone than 
in all the cities of Maharashtra put together, and the extreme 
elaboration of their details gives the Orissan examples a 
superiority that the western temples cannot pretend to rival. 

Among the oldest and most characteristic of the Dhirw&r 
temples is that of PApanAtha, at Pattadakal. As will be seen 
from the plan of this temple given above (Woodcut No. 182, 
vol. i., page 322), the cell, with its tower, has not the same predomi- 
nating importance which it always had in Orissa ; and instead 
of a mere vestibule it has a four-pillared porch, which would 
in itself be sufficient to' form a complete temple on the eastern 
side of India. Beyond this, however, is the great porch, 
Mandapa, or Jagamohan — square, as usual, but here it possesses 
sixteen pillars, in four groups, instead of the astylar arrange- 
ments so common in the east. It is, in fact, a copy, with very 
slight alterations, of the plan of the great 5 aiva temple at the 
same place (Woodcut No. 204), or the Kailas at ElurA (Wood- 
cut No. 199). These, with others, form a group of early temples 



NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 


ttS 

wholly Dravidian in style, but having no affinity, except in plan, 
with the temple of P&panitha, which is as essentially Indo- 
Aryan. in its architectural arrangements. This, in fact, may be 
looked upon as the characteristic difference between the styles of 
Dhirw&r and Orissa. The western style, from its proximity to 
the Dravidian and admixture with it, in fact, used pillars freely 
and with effect whenever wanted ; while their use in Orissa 
is almost unknown in the best ages of the style, and their 
introduction, as it took place there, showed only too clearly 
the necessity that had arisen in the decay of the style, to supply 
with foreign forms the want of originality of invention. 



323. View of Temple of P&pati&tha at Pattadakal. (From a Photograph.) 


The external effect of the building may be judged of from the 
above woodcut (No. 323). The outline of the tower is not 
unlike that of the Para.rurSmerwar temple at Bhuvane.rwar, 
with which it was probably contemporary — .\.n. 700 — 



Chap. III. 


DHARWAR. 


119 

but the central belt is more pronounced, and always apparently 
was on the west side of India. It will also be observed in this 
tower that every third course has on the angle a form which has 
been described as an amalaka in speaking of the crowning 
members of northern temples. Here it looks as if the two 
intermediate courses simulated roofs, or a roof in two storeys, 
and then this crowning member was introduced, and the same 
thing repeated over and over again till the requisite height was 
obtained. In the Parajurimerwar there are three intermediate 
courses (Woodcut No. 312) ; in the great tower at Bhuvanerwar, 
five ; and in the more modern temples they disappear from the 
angles, but are supplied by the miniature temple-forms applied 
to the sides. In the temple at Bodh-Gay^ the same form" 
occurs (Woodcut No. 19) on the angle of each storey ; but 
there it looks more like the capital of a pillar, which, in fact, 
I believe to be its real original. But from whatever form 
derived, this repetition on the angles is in the best possible 
taste; the eye is led upwards by it, and is prepared for the 
crowning member, which is thus no longer isolated and alone, 
but a part of a complete design. 

The frequency of the repetition of this ornament is, so far as 
is now known, no bad test of the age of a temple. If an 
example were found where every alternate course was an 
amalaka, it probably would be older than any temple we have 
yet knovvn. It would then represent a series of roofs, five, 
seven, or nine storeys, built over one another. It had, how- 
ever, passed into conventionalities before we meet with it. 

To the north-west of Aihole is a 5 aiva cave-temple,^ and 
near it on the north-west is an old temple with a porch on 
four plain square pillars, the mandap built of massive stones, 
with a sloping roof, a pradakshina round the shrine, and, from 
the figure of Karttikeya on the roof of the entrance porch 
and of Garuda on the lintel of the shrine door, it was evidently 
dedicated to Vishnu (Plate XXIII.) It is known as the 
temple of HuchchhTmalligudi, and appears to be of quite as early 
a date as any at Bhuvanejwar or elsewhere. The 5 ikhara is 
relatively small, and if we compare this temple with that of 
Parajuramejwar (Woodcut No. 312), we observe that the latter 
is much more developed in style than the former. Unfortu- 
nately we have no direct record of its construction, the only 
indication of its date is an inscription on the north side of the 
west front, recording a grant for oil made in the thirteenth year 
of the Chalukya King Vijayiditya, that is in 718 A.D. but 
the temple was clearly then established, we know not how 

^ * Archi^ological Survey of Western Kaladgi,* pp. 38*40. 

India,’ vol. i. ; ‘ Report on Belgiim and ‘ Indian Antiquary,’ vol. viii. p. 284. 



tso 


NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 


long previously, though we may fairly assume that it had been 
erected at least as early as, if not before, the reign of Vikram- 
ftditya (655 to 680 A.D.). Indeed, comparing it with the temple 
of Fdpan&tha at Pattadakal (Woodcut No. 323) we are at once 
struck by the more ancient style of the features of this, and 
would be quite prepared, on fair evidence, to ascribe it to the 
b^inning of the 7th century or soon after. 

When the drawings made by the Archaeological Survey 
of the temples of this district ^ are completely published, they 
will, no doubt, throw immense light on the early history of 
this style.^ As the case now stands, however, the principal 
interest centres in the caves of Bidimi, which being the only 
Brahmanical caves known that have a positive date upon them, 
they give us a Axed point from which to reason in respect of 
other series such ais we never had before. 

Brahmanical Rock-cut Temples. 

Although the structural temples of the B^ld&mi group ^ in 
Dhirwclr are of such extreme interest, as has been pointed 
out above, they are surpassed in importance, for our present 
purposes at least, by the rock-cut examples. 

At B&dimi there are three caves, not of any great dimensions, 
but of singular interest from their architectural details and 
sculptured, Rnd more so from the fact that one of them, No. 3, 
contains an inscription with an undoubted date upon it. There 
are, as pointed out above, innumerable Buddhist inscriptions 
on the western caves, but none with dates from any well- 
ascertained era, and none, unfortunately, of the Brahmanical 
caves at EluiA or elsewhere have inscriptions that can be fully 
deciphered, and not one with a date on it. The consequence 
is, that the only mode by which their ages could be approxi- 
mated was by arranging them in sequences, according to our 
empirical or real knowledge of the history of the period during 
which they were supposed to have been excavated. At £ 10 r&, 
for instance, it was assumed that the Buddhist preceded the 
Brahmanical excavations, and that these were succeeded by 
the Jaina; and various local and architectural peculiarities 

* The works as yet published on and Pattadakal 8 miles east-north-east 

this subject are the ' Architectjure in from Bldftmi. Fifteen miles covers 
Dhiiwir and Mysore,’ fol., 100 plates, the whole, whidi must have been 
Murray, 1866; Burgess's ‘Atclueological in the 6th or yth century a place of 
Report on the &lg&m and Kaladgi great importance, V&t8pipata or B&dftmi 
Districts,’ 1874; and Rea’s ‘Chalukyan being 'then the capital of the Chalukyas 
Architecture,’ I896. —‘Journal Royal Asiatic Society,’ voL iv. 

* For architectural purposes the three p. 9; 'Indian Antiquary,’ vol. viii. p. 

g laces may be considered as one. Aihole .743. 

; about 7 miles north-east of Pattadakal, 



Chap. III. BRAHMANICAL ROCK-CUT TEMPLES. t>i 

rendered this hypothesis extremely probable. Arguing on this 
basis, it was found that the one chaitya cave there, Ae Virwa- 
karma, was n^ly identicai in style with the last of the four 
chaityas at AjantS (No. 26), and that cave, for reasons given 
above, was placed at the end of the 6th century, say A.D. 600. 
The caves next it were assumed to occupy the yth century, 
thus leading on to the Rlmerwara group, about A.D. yoo, and 
the Jaina group would then have occupied the 9th century. 
The age of the Kail&s or Dravidian group, being exceptional, 
could only be determined by extraneous evidence, and, as 
already pointed out, from its extreme similarity with the great 
temple at Pattadakal, belongs almost certainly to the 8th 
century ; and from a similar chain of reasoning the Jaina group 
is brought back to a slightly subsequent age. 

The inscription of the No. 3 cave at B&d&mi is dated in the 
twelfth year of the reign of a well-known king, KIrtivarman I., 
in ‘ the 500th year after the inauguration of the .Saka king ’ ; 
the date therefore is A.D. 578. Admittiflg, which I think its 
architecture renders nearly certain, that it is the earliest of the 
three, still they are so like one another, that the latest may be 
assumed to have been excavated within the limits of the next 
century, say A.D. 575-680. Comparing the architecture of this 
group with that known as the central or RAmerwara group at 
ElOri, it is so nearly identical, that though it may be slightly 
more modem, it can hardly now be doubted th^ too, including 
perhaps the cave known as the RAvana-ka-khai, must have 
been excavated in the 7th century. Instead, therefore, of the 
sequence formerly adopted, we are forced to fall back on that 
marvellous picture of religious toleration described by the 
Chinese Pilgrim as exhibited at Aiiab&bid in the year A.D. 643. 
On that occasion the King Harsha .Sil&ditya distributed alms 
or gifts to 10,000 priests (religiettx), the first day in honour of 
Buddha, the second of Aditya the Sun, and the third in honour 
of trwara or S'iva ; ^ and the eighteen kings who assisted at 
this spiendid quinquennial festival seem promiscuously to have 
honoured equally these three divinities. With this toleration 
at headquarters, we ought not to be surprised if we find the 
temples of different religions overlapping one another to some 
extent. 

As a reminiscence of the eclecticism of .the tim^ it re- 
quires some experience in the antiquary to ascertain to what 
divinity a temple or cave, before the 8th century, was dedicated. 
In the D&s Avat&ra and RAvan-ka-khai caves at Elfirfi, for 

* ‘Histoirede HiouenThsangt’p. 255; ‘ Vie et Vowges,’ tome i. p. 280; or Beal’s 
' Buddhist Records,’ vol. i. p. 233 ; and ‘ Life,’ pp. 1S5L 



taa NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 
instance, we find the sculptures about equally divided between 



.Suva and Vaishnava subjects, whilst the shrines contain 
lingams of .Siva ; and in two of the three B^d^mi caves, 


te Das Avatara Cave-temple at ElOra. (From a Photograph.) 



Chap. in. BRAMMANICAL ROCK-CUT TEMPLES. 


1*3 


whilst the larger figures are mostly Vaishnava, the others are 
largely 5 aiva, and the vedis or altars in the middle of both 
shrines may properly be supposed to have supported the 
emblem of 5 ‘iva 

The Dis Avatira (No. 1 5) at Elfiri, is a two-storeyed cave, 
very similar in its architectural details to the Buddhist Ddn 
Thai and Tin Thai, but the sculptures are all Brahmanical. At 
first sight it seems as if the excavation had been made by the 
Buddhists, and appropriated and finished by their successors. 
But on examination it appears that we owe it entirely to the 



325. Plan of the Upper Floor of the D&s Avat&ra Cave at £l(ir^, Scale 50 ft. to i in.* 

Brahmans. It is, perhaps, the earliest Brahmanical temple here ; 
and it is natural to suppose that when the 5 aivas attempted to 
rival their antagonists in cave-temples they should follow the 
models that already existed, merely appropriating them to their 
own worship. The circumstance, however, that makes this most 
probable is the existence of a pseudo-structural mandapa, or shrine 
of the Nandi, in the courtyard (Woodcut No. 324) ; this evidently 
must have been a part of the original design, or the rock would 


‘ Reduced from * Cave Temples of India,’ plate 74. 





124 


NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE Book VI. 


not have been left here for it, and it is a model of the usual 
structural building found in 5'aiva temples in different parts of 
India^ This is a piece of bad grammar the Buddhists never 
were guilty of ; their excavations always are caves, whilst the 
great characteristic of Brahmanical excavations, as distinguished 
^m that of their predecessors, is that they generally copied 
structural buildings, a system that rose to its greatest height 
in the Kail&s, already described (vol. i., page 344). The Buddhist 
excavations, on the contrary, were always caves and nothing else. 
The ground floor is little more than a corridor, 95 ft. in length, 
and about 30 ft. deep, with cells. The upper storey hall, of which 
Woodcut No. 325 is the plan, is nearly square — 95 ft. wide by 
97 ft. deep — the roof supported by forty-four square pillars, of 
which those in front are richly carved. The recesses between the 
pilasters in the side walls are filled with large sculptures in alto- 
rilievo — those on the north side being 5aiva, and on the other 
mostly Vaishnava. 

Unfortunately there are no Buddhist buildings or caves so 
far south as B&d&mi, and we are consequently deprived of that 
means for comparison : such as are south of Kclrl£, at Karh&d, 
etc., are of little or no account architecturally. The result, 
however, of the translations of inscriptions collected during the 
last thirty-five years, and of the surveys made, leads us to 
compress our history of the western caves within narrower 
limits than at one time seemed necessary. The caves in the 
south of Bij&pQr district seem all to be comprised between the 
years 500 and 750 A.D., and those at Eluri, being synchronous, 
must also, with the exception of the Jaina caves, be limited 
to the same period of time, with probably a slight extension 
either way. 

The following may now be offered as an approximate 
chronolcgy of the far-famed series of caves at Elfira : 


Buddhist : — Vlrvakama to Ttn Thhi 500-650 

Hindft: — D&s Avat&ra, R&van-ka-Khai, and R&mervara 650-750 
Dhumar Lend and others . 750-850 

Dravidian : — Kailds .... 750-800 

Jaina : — Indra and Jagannith Sabhds, etc. 800- 1 100 


The cave at Elephanta follows of course the date here 
given for the Dhumdr Lena, and must thus date after the 
middle of the 8th century.* 

* The Rdshtrakftts inscrij>tion on this Western India,’ vol. v. p. 87. 
mandapa is onl^ very partially legible, * This is the date given in the descrip- 
and is probably of later date than the tion in * The Caves of Elephanta,’ 
work. — ' Aichteological Survey of Bombay, iSyt, p. 5. 



Chap. III. BRAHMANICAL ROCK-CUT TEMPLES. 


These dated caves and buildings have also rendered another 
service to the science of archaeology, inasmuch as they enabled 
us to state with confidence, even before the inscriptions were 
properly translated, that the principal caves at M&mallapuram 
must be circumscribed within the same limits. The architec- 
ture there being so lean and poor, is most misleading, but, as 
hinted above, I believe it arose from the fact that it was 
Dravidian, and copied literally from structural buildings, by 
people who had not the long experience of the Buddhists in 
cave architecture to guide them. But be that as it may, a 
comparison of the Hindu sculptures at B^d^mi with those 
of Eluri on the one hand, and M^mallapuram on the 
other, renders it certain that they were practically contem- 
porary. The famous bas-relief of DurgA, on her lion, slaying 
Mahish^sura, the Minotaur;^ is earlier than one very similar to 
it at Elur^ ; and one, the VirAtarupa or Vfimana, is later by 
probably a century than the sculpture of the same subject in 
cave 3 at BAdftmi.^ Some of the other bas-reliefs are later, 
some earlier, than those representing similar subjects in the 
three series, but it seems now impossible to get over the fact 
that they are practically synchronous. Even the great bas- 
relief, which I was inclined to* assign to a more modern period, 
probably belongs to the 7th or 8th century. The great N^ga 
king, whom all the world are there worshipping, is represented 
as a man vrhose head is shaded by a seven-headed serpent- 
hood, but also with a serpent-body from the waist downwards. 
That form was not known in the older Buddhist sculptures, but 
has now been found on all the Orissan temples (for instance 
Woodcut No. 318), and frequently at Bad^mi.® This difficulty 
being removed, there seems no reason why this gigantic 
sculpture should not take the place, which its state of execu- 
tion would otherwi.se assign to it — say A.D. 700 ~-as a mean 
date, subject to a subsequent adjustment.* 

In a general work like the present it is of course impossible 
to illustrate so extensive a group as that of the Brahmanical 
caves to such an extent as to render their history or affinities 
intelligible to those who have not by any other means become 
familiar with the subject. Fortunately, however, in this in- 
stance, sufficient literature on the subject is available by which 
any one may readily attain the desired information.® 

^ ‘ Transactions of the Royal Asiatic ® Apart from the older works, refer- 
Society,* vol. ii. plate 4. once may be made to * The Cave 

^Loc, cit, plate 6; and Burgess, ‘Re- Temples of India*- (1880), pp. 165 et 
port on Belgam,* etc., plate 31. segq, ; the * Reports of the Archaeolorical 

* Loc, cit. plates 20, 23, 40. Survey of Western India,* vols. i. iii. v, 

^ ^ There is a second bas-relief, almost and vi. ; and ‘ The Rock Temples of 
similar but in worse preservation, about Elephanta’ (Bombay, 1871). 

30 yards south from this. 



ta6 NORTHERN OR INDaARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 

After all, however, the subject is one more suited to the 
purposes of the mythologist and the sculptor than to the 
architect Like all rock-cut examples, except the Dravidian, 
the caves have the intolerable defect of having no exteriors, 
amd consequently no external architectural form. The only 
parts of them which strictly belong to architectural art are 
their pillars, and though a series of them would be interesting, 

they vary so much, from the 
nature of the material in 
which they are carved, and 
from local circumstances, that 
they do not possess the same 
historical significance that 
external forms would afford. 
Such a pillar, for instance, as 
this one from the cave called 
Lanke.rvara on the side of the 
pit in which the Kail&s stands 
(Woodcut No. 326), though in 
exquisite taste as a rock - cut 
example, where the utmost 
strength is apparently re- 
quire to support the mass 
of rock above, does not afford 
any points of comparison with 
structural examples of the 
same age. In a building it 
would be cumbersome and 
absurd ; under a mass of rock 
it is elegant and appropriate. 
The pillars in the caves at 
M&mallapuram fail from the 
opposite fault: they retain their structural form, though used 
in the rock, and look frail and weak in consequence ; but while 
this diversity in practice prevailed, it prevents their use as a 
chronometric scale being appreciated, as it would be if the 
practice had been uniform. As, however, No. 3 at Bid&mi is 
a cave with a positive date, A.D. 578, it may ^ well to give 
a plan and section (Woodcuts Nos. 327 and 328) to illustrate 
its peculiarities, so as to enable a comparison to be made 
between it and other examples. Its details will be found fully 
illustrated in the first volume pf the Survey of Western India. 

Though not one of the largest, it is still a fine cave, its 
verandah measuring 70 ft, with a depth of 50 ft., beyond 
which is a simple plain cell, containing the altar for the imi^. 
At one end of the verandah is the Narasinha Avatira ; at the 




187 


Chap. III. BRAHMANICAL ROCK-CUT TEMPLES. 

other end Vishnu seated on the five-headed serpent Ananta. 
The front ^pillars have three brackets each, of very wooden d^ign, 
all of which are ornamented by two 
or three figures, generally a male and 
female, with a child or dwarf— all of 
considerable beauty and delicacy of 
execution. The inner pillars are 
varied, and more architectural in their 
forms, but in the best style of Hindfi 
art.^ 

Compared with the style of art 
found at Amar^vatt, on the opposite 
coast, it is curious to observe how 
nearly Buddha, seated on the many- 3*7. PUn of Cave No, 3. rndami. 
headed Nilga,* resembles Vishnu on 
Ananta in the next woodcut, and 

though the religion is changed, the art has hardly altered to 
such an extent as might be expected, considering that three 



328. Section of C'.ive No. 3, B.^di\ini. (From a Drawing by J. Burgess.) 

Scale 25 ft. lo I in. 

centuries at least had probably elapsed between the execution 
of these two bas-reliefs. The change of religion, however, is 
complete. 

Sometimes the Hindis successfully conquered one of the 
main difficulties of cave architecture by excavating them on 
the spur of a hill, as in the Dhumar Lena at Elfiri, and by 
surrounding them by courts, as there and at Elephanta and 
at Jogejwar; so that light was introduced on three sides in- 
stead of only one, as was tbo often the case both with Buddhist 
and Hindu excavations. These, though probably among the 
last, are certainly the finest Hindtl excavations existing, if 
looked at from an architectural point of view. The Elfird 
example is the larger and finer, measuring 149 ft. by 148 
(Woodcut No. 329). That at Elephanta, though extremely 
similar in general arrangement (No. 330), is less r^ular in 

'Burgess, * Report on Belgam and I *'Tree and .Serpent Worship, ’ ploff yfi • 
Kaladgi,’ plates 84-35. I and'CaveTemplesof India,' plate 39, ’ 





ia8 


NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 



Dhumar Lena Cave at ElftrA. 
(From Daniell's 'Views in Hindostan.' 
Scale loo ft. to i in. 


plan, and also somewhat smaller, measuring only 130 ft. by 
129 ft. It is easy to see that if these temples stood in the 

open they would only 
be porches, like that at 
Belilr (Woodcut No. 
257), and numberless 
other examples, which 
are found everywhere ; 
but the necessities of 
rock - cut architecture 
required generally that 
the cella should be 
placed inside the man- 
dapa, or porch, instead 
of externally to it, as 
was always the case 
in structural examples. 
This, perhaps, was 
hardly to be regretted ; 
but it shows how little the practice of cutting temples in the 

rock was suited 
to the temple- 
forms of the 
HindOs, and we 
need not, there- 
fore, feel surprised 
how readily they 
abandoned it 
when any idea 
of rivalling the 
Buddhists had 
ceased to prompt 
their efforts in 
this direction. 

In the capitals 
of the pillars in 
these caves, as 

represented in the accompanying woodcut (No. 331) from the 
Elephanta cave, we find the perfected form of those ribbed 
cushion-capitals that are found at Bidflmi and in so many other 
caves, dating from at least as early as the 6th century ; but in 
these excavations it seems to have reached its fullest develop- 
ment and beauty of form. From its frequent recurrence of 



Elephanta Cave. 

‘Ian by J. Burgc.ss.) 
Scale 100 ft to I in. 


lep] 
(From a Pli 


* Daniell’s plan is not quite accurate, l>ut sufficiently so for our purpose. See 
^Cave Temples of India,’ plate 79, and ’Archaeological Survey of Western India/ 
vol. V. plate 37. 



Chap. III. BRAHMANICAL ROCK-CUT TBMPLE& 


i<9 


earlier and later date it has come to be consideied the ^cal 
capital of early Indian architecture. It may be compared to 
the Doric order of classical 
art as, in the same way, the 
vase with foliage fallii^ 
over it, as exemplified in 
the RAmerwara cave and 
elsewhere, may be regarded 
as an Orientu type of the 
Ionic order. This ribbed 
cushion form of capital also 
reminds us of the amallrilA 
crown to Hindil rikharas^ 
though we may be unable 
to say from what it has 
been derived, we can'hardly 
escape the conviction that 
in their origin they are 
akin. 

So far as I know, there 
is only one example where 
the Indo-Aryan architects 
attempted to rival the 
Dravidian in producing a 
monolithic exterior. It is 

at a place called OhamnAr, ^ ™ .. 

in Rajputana, where, as" (From * Phottwh.) 

already mentioned (ante, 

vol. i., pp. 165 and 200), there is an extensive series of Buddhist 
excavations. In order to mark their triumph over that fallen 
faith, tite HindAs, apparently late in the 8th century, drove an 
open cutting into the side of the hill, till thty came to a part 
high enough for their purpose. Here th^ enliuged this cutting 
into a pit 97^ ft by 67 ft, leaving a Vaishnava temple of elegant 
areUtecture standing in the centre, with seven small cells 
snrnmnding it, precisely as was done in the case of the KailAs 
at filArA. The effect, however, can hardly be said to be 
pleasit^ (Woodcut No. 332). A temple standing in a pit is 
mways an anomaly, but in this instance it is valuable as an 
unaltered example of tiie style, and as showing how the small 
shrines of 5 ivAlayas ^which have too offm disappeared— 
were originally grouped round the greater .Saiva shrines. The 
vidue of this characteristic we shall be better able to appreciate 
when we come to describe the temples at Frambanan and other 



vol. L p. 323. 


* AfUt, vol. i. p. 336. 



130 NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 

placM in Java. The Buddhists had their cells for priests and 
ascetics ; the Jains filled their residential cells with images 



33a. Rock-cut Temple at Dhamn&r. (From a Plan by Gen. Cunningham.) 

Scale 50 ft. to I in. 

and made them little temples ; and the Hindfis in their shrines 
made smaller cellae for the attendants or family of the god. 



333. 5 «iva Temple ^ear Poona. (From a Sketch by DanielL) 

One more illustration must conclude what we have at 
present to say of Hindd rock-cut temples. It is the temple 
of Panchilervara at BhAmburdd near Poona, and is but little 
known, though much more appropriate to cave architecture 





Chap. III. BRAHMANICAL ROCK-CUT TEMPLES. 131 

than most examples of its class. The temple itself is a simple 
pillared hall, with eight pillars in front, 
and possibly had originally a structural 
jikhara built on the upper plateau to mark 
the position of the sanctuary (Woodcut 
No. 334). The most original part of it, 
however, is the Nandi pavilion, which 
stands in the courtyard in front of the 
temple (Woodcut No. 333V It is circular 
in plan, and its roof — which is a great slab 
of rock — was supported by sixteen square 
pillars of very simple form — four within and 
twelve in the circumference, — of which four 
have now crumbled and fallen. Altogether 
it is as appropriate a bit of design as is to 
be found in Hindu cave architecture. It 
has, however, the defect — only too common 
in those Hindu excavations — that, being 334* Temple ^ PanchAi- 
m a pit, it can be looked down upon ; scale 100 ft. to x in. 
which is a test very few buildings can 
stand, and to which none ought to be exposed.® 

^ There is a similar temple at Amba India/ vol. iii. p. 50, and plates 33, 34. 
near Mominabad, in the llaidariibdd State. ^ * Cave Temples of India,* p. 426 and 
— ‘ Archeological Survey of Western plate 69. 




CHAPTER IV. 


CENTRAL AND NORTHERN INDIA. 

CONTENTS. 

Chandr&vati and Baroli — Ktrtti-stambhas — Temples at Gwiliar, Khajur&ho, 
Sinnar, Udayapur, Benares, Bindriban, K^tanagar, Amritsar. 


There are certainly more than one hundred temples in Central 
and Northern India which are well worthy of being described in 
detail, and, if described and illustrated, would convey a wonderful 
impression of the fertility in invention of the ‘ Hindi! mind and 
of the elegance with which it was capable of expressing itself. 
None of these temples can make the smallest pretension to rival 
the great southern examples in scale ; they are all, indeed, 
smaller even than the greater of Orissan examples ; and while 
some of them surpass the Orissan temples in elegance of form, 
many rival ' them in the profuse elaboration of minute orna- 
mental details. 

None of these temples — none, at least, that are now 
complete — ^seem to be of any great antiquity. At Eran, in 
the S^gar district, are some fragments of columns, and several 
sculptures that seem to belong to the flourishing age of the 
Guptas, say about AD. 450 ; and in the Mukandw^ri Pass in 
Koti, there are the remains of a chaultri that may be as old, 
but it is a mere fragment,^ and has no inscription upon it. 

Among the more complete examples, the oldest I know of, 
and consequently the most beautiful, is the porch or temple of 
Sttalervara at Chandr^vatt, near Jhfdr&pathan, in Rajputana.^ 
Assuming that it belongs to the early years of the 9th centuiy, 
with the chflwadt in the Mukandw&r^ Pass, and the pillars at 


^ A view of this was published in 
my ‘Pictnresque Illustrations of Indian 
Architecture,* plate 5. 

** In its neighbourhood Colonel Tod 
found an inscrif^ion, dated 746 of an era, 
not named, which at one time I thought 
might have been taken from this temple, 
and Gonsequently might pve its we 
about A.D. 689, which would fairly agree 


with the style, judged from that of some 
of the caves at Eliirft, which it veiy much 
resembles. ' Picturesque Illustrations of 
Ancient Architecture in Hindostan,’ plate 
6, with description. Tod*s ‘ Annals of 
Rajasthan,* vol. ii. p. 734. His trans- 
lation, however, was worthless ; the date 
is more probably of a.d. 884. — 'Indum 
Antiquary,* vol. v. pp. i8of. 



Chap. IV. CHANDRAVATL IS3 

Eran, this Chandr&vatt fragment completes the list of what we 
at present can feel sure of having been erected before the middle 
of the 9th century. There are doubtless 
others, such as the temples at Path&ri and 
Tigow^, that may be of even an earlier 
age, and it would be well they were 
examined, for this is one of the most 
elegant specimens of architecture of its 
period (Woodcut No. 335). It has not 
the poetry of arrangement of the Jaina 
octagonal domes, but it approaches very 
nearly to them by the large square space 
in the centre, which was covered by one 
of the most elegantly designed and most 
exquisitely carved roofs known to exist 
anywhere. Its arrangement is evidently 
borrowed from that of Buddhist vihiras, 
and' it differs from them in style because l- , . , . , , 

their interiors were plastered and painted , 
here, on the contrary, everything is carved 335- 
in stone.' It is a 5 aiva shrine. 

Leaving these fragments, one of the oldest, and certainly one 
of the most perfect, in Central India is the desecrated temple 
at Baroli, situated in a wild and romantic spot not far from the 
falls of the Chambal, whose distant roar in the still night is the 
only sound that breaks the silence of the solitude around them 
The principal temple, represented in the Woodcut No. 336, may 
probably, pending a more precise determination, be ascribed to 
the 9th or loth century, and is one of the few of that age now 
known ; it was originally dedicated to 5 iva. Its general out- 
line is identical with that of the contemporary Orissan temples. 
But instead of the astylar enclosed porch, or mandapa, it has a 
pillared portico of great elegance, whose roof reaches half-way 
up the temple, and is sculptured with a richness and complexity 
of design ' almost unrivalled, even in those days of patient 
prodigality of labour. It will be observed in the plan (Wood- 
cut No. 337) that the dimensions are remarkably small, and 
the temple is only 58 ft. high, so that its merit consists entirely 
in its shape and proportions, and in the elegance and profusion 
of the ornament that covers it. 



^ Tod (vol. ii. pp. 733ff.)> gives several 
plates of the details of the porch by a 
native artist^fairly well drawn— but want- 
ing shadow to render them intelligible. 
Unfortunately we now learn that this 
monument had been repaired two or three 


years ago, with ugly masonry, plaster 
and whitewash. Such is what has to be 
expected, wherever an ancient monument 
is repaired by Hindils or entrusted to the 
ordinary engineer to clean. 



134 NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 

In front of the temple is a detached porch, called a Ch&wadt 
or nuptial hall, similar to that in front of the temple at Mudheri 




Chap. IV. 


BAROLI. 


*3S 


to have been erected;^ but whether this is so or not, it is 
one of the finest examples of such detached halls known in 
the north. We miss here the oct^onal dome of the Jains, 
which would have given elegance and relief to its ceiling, though 
the variety in the spacing of the 
columns has been attained by a 
different process. When the dome 
was first employed in Hindfi archi- 
tecture, they seem to have at- 
tempted to gain sufficient relief 
to their otherwise monotonous 
arrangement of columns by break- 
ing up the external outline of the 
plan of the mandapa, and by 
ranging the aisles, as it were, 
diagonally across the building, 
instead of placing them parallel 
to the sides. 

Other two temples here, to the 
south of the preceding, are smaller 
but essentially of the same style, 
though more pointed in their form,' 
and are consequently either more 
modern in date, or if of the same 
age — which may doubtless be the 
case — would bring the date of the 
whole group down to the loth 
century, which, after all, may be 
their true date. 

The larger of the two is known 
as the temple of PArvatt, and in 
front of it, a little way from the great temple, were two pillars, 
one of which (still standing in 1873) is here represented* 
(Woodcut No. 338). They evidently supported one of those 
torans, or archways, which succeeded the gateways of the 
Buddhist topes, and form frequently a very pleasing adjunct 
to Hindi!! temples. From the architraves of certain of these, 
the god was swung at certain festivals. They are, however, frail 
edifices at best, and easily overthrown, wherever the bigotry 
of the Moslims came into play. 



338 


Pillar at Baroli. 

(From a Plate in Tod’s ' Annals 
of Rajasthan.') 


^ Tod’s ‘ Annals of Rajasthan,’ vol. ii. * For a photograph of this and of the 
p. 712. For the legend ot Rija Hdna and two neighbouring temples, see *Archi- 
Pingali Rani, see * Indian Antiquary,’ lecture and Scenery in Gujarat and 
vol, ii. p. 215. Rajputana,’ plate 22. 



136 


NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 


KIrtti-stambha Gateways. 

Toran gateways or Kirtti-^tambhas, as above remarked, were 
common adjuncts to Hindd temples as well as to Buddhist 
stSpas. The gateways at Sftnchi and Bharaut are the earliest 
we- can now point to ; but of similar purpose, though of very 
different construction, were such gateways as those at Baroli 
and the four already mentioned at Worangal (vol. i., p. 435X 
which may belong to the 12th century. But there are others 
of the same character that may. be here mentioned. The 
only one yet known in the Dekhan is at the ruined temple 
of Galagan&th, outside Aihole, which still retains the lintel 
support^ by two massive square carved pillars, and from 
the style and carving may date from about A.D. 900; but if 
there ever was a pediment over the lintel it has totally 
disappeared. 

Of more ornate style is one at Pathiri, in the Gw&liar 
territory, about 1 1 miles south-eakt from Eran, where are also 
many remains of great antiquity and interest. It stands in 
front of an old temple called Gidarmar. The shafts of the 
pillars are sixteen sided with Gupta bases and capitals of the 
same pattern as the pillar from the Eran temple (Woodcut 
Na 166 ). The brackets that support the toran arch — now 
lost~-also libre female and animal figures on four sides, but 
these are mostly now lost Above these brackets the pillars 
are circular, and support a large abacus on the inner projections 
of which rests the richly-carved lintel, which carries over its 
centre a circular stone or amalastli, with lions on each of 
the end blocks.^ It has had no pediment, and must belong 
to the age of the Gupta remains at Eran. 

In front of the great Sfltya temple at Mudheri in Gujar&t 
there stood a fine Ktrtti-stambha gateway, but the whole of 
the {i^iment has fallen, and only the pillars, 24 ft. 6 in. high, 
remain standing of the structure erected in A.D. 1026. But, 
besides the arch at the Rudra Mah&laya at Siddhapur, about 32 ft. 
in height, but now considerably injured, there are at Vadnagar, 
tile ancient Anandapur, two fine examples almost entire, about 
3 Si ft. in height. The photc^raphic view (Plate XXIV.), will 
enable the reader to form an idea of the style of these Gujar&t 
Ktrtti-stambhas. They must have belonged to some large 
temple in this once notable sacred city. Another smaller but 
similar gateway, of nearly 23 ft. total height, stands atove a 

* * Ancient Monuments, Templet, etc., of India,’ plate ass ; * Journal Asiat. Soc. 
of Beafal,' vol. arlL pp. 3076. 



Chap. IV. 


GWALIAR. 


*37 


kund or sacred tank at Kipadvanj, about 6o miles south* 
south-east from the last* 

At Rewi, the capital of B&ghelkhand, about 30 miles east 
from Satn& railway station, is the most richly sculptured of 
all these gateways. It was brought from the ruins of OAif'ip 
Masaun, an old deserted city, 12 miles east from Rew&, and set 
up'in front of the palace. It is about lift, wide and 17 ft.- to 
the underside of the lintel, which is of three superimposed 
blocks of a height of about 6 ft 9 in. very richly carved, the 
middle course beinjpf perforated right through and showing the 
figures in full relief The upper corner blocks and pediment — 
if ever they existed — are wanting. Like most of the others it 
is Brahmanical and is covered with figure sculptures of all sizes, 
largely female, with devatas and griffons.* It may probably 
belong to the end of the 12th century. There is still another 
gateway at Gy&raspur and the latest are perhaps thdse on the 
dam at Rljasamudra. 

GwAliar. 


The oldest temple at Gw&liar is, doubtless, the small one 
on the road up to the fort, excavated in the solid rock and 
dedicated to Chaturbhuj or Vishnu.' It bears two inscriptions 
stating that it was made by the governor of the fort in A.D. 875. 
It is only 12 ft. square, with a portico in front 10 ft by 9 ft, 
supported on two advanced pillars. The roof is a truncated 
pyramid divided into small steps, resembling that on the 
Dhamn&r rock-temple, and in details like the Teli Mandir. 
This is crowned by a small modern dome.* 

There are, however, in the fortress here, two very remark- 
able temples : one, known as the S&s-Bahf^, has been mistaken 
for a Jaina erection, but it is designated and dedicated to 
Padmanibha or Vishnu.* The first temple was finished 
apparently in A.D. 1093,* and, though dreadfully ruined, is still 
a most picturesque fragment. What remains is the cruciform 
porch of a temple which, when complete, measured 100 ft. from 
front to rear, and 63 ft. across the arms of the porch. Of the 
sanctuaiy, with its rikhara, nothing is left but the foundation ; 


^ 'Archaeological Survey of Western 
India,’ vol. ix., pp. 67, 79, 84, and 
pUtes 4a, 49» J7f and 59; vol. viii. 
p. 94 and plate Sh. 

* L. Gnffin’s ' Famous Monuments of 
Central India,’ plates 87-89; Cunning- 
ham’s 'Reports,’ vol. xix. p. 80 and 
plate 19. 

’ Cunningham, 'Reports,’ vol. x. p. 33. 

^ ' Epigraphia Indicu,' vol. i. pp. 154^; 
Cunningham, 'Archaeological Reports,' 


vol. ii. pp. 335, 355 ; and Sir L. Griffin, 
' Famous Monuments of Central India,’ 
plate 39. 

* RAjendralftl Mitra who translated the 
inscription read * Padman&tha ’ and tried 
to identify the name with Padmapra- 
bhan&tha the 6th Tlrthankafa.---Canniiig- 
ham, 'Archaeological ReporU,’ vol. u. 
P* 357 - 

* ' Indian Antiquary,’ vol. xv. p. 36. 




339* Sas-Bahfi Temple at Gwdliar. (From a Photograph. ) 


Chap. IV, 


GWALIAR. 


*39 




140 


NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 


but the porch, which is three storeys in height, is constructively 
entire, though its details — and principally those of its roof— are 
very much shatter^ (Woodcut No. 339). 

An older temple is described by General Cunningham,* but, 
as it was used as a mosque, there is too little of ^e original 
structure left to show the character of the design. A mutilated 
inscription was dated in A.D. 1108, and several Jaina images 
were found in the substructure. 

At the same place there is another, bearing the not very 
dignified name of the Teli-ka-Mandir, or Oilman's Temple 
(Woodcut No. 340). It is a square of 60 ft. each way, with 
a portico on the east projecting about lift. Unlike the other 
temples we have been describing, it docs not terminate upwards 
in a pyramid, nor is it crowned by an amalaka, but in a 
ridge of about 30 ft. in extent, which may originally have 
had three amalakas upon it. I cannot help believing that 
this form of temple was once more common than we now 
find it. There are several examples of it at M&mallapuram 
(Woodcut Nos. 185, 193, 194), evidently copied from a form 
common among the Buddhists, and one very beautiful example 
is found at Bbuvanejwar,* there called Kapila Devt, and dedicated 
to 5 iva. The Teli - ka - Mandir was originally dedicated to 
Vishnu, but there is no inscription or any tradition from which 
its date can be gathered ; on the whole, however, we may place 
it about th'e'ioth or nth century.* 

EhajurAho. 

As mentioned above, the finest and most extensive group of 
temples belonging to the Northern or Indo- Aryan style of 
architecture is that gathered round the great temple at 
Bhuvanejwar. They are also the most interesting historically, 
inasmuch as their dates extend through four or five centuries, 
and they alone consequently enable us to bridge over the dark 
ages of Indian art. From its remote situation, Orissa seems to 
have escaped, to some extent at least, from the troubles that 
agitated northern and western India during the Middle Ages ; 
and though from this cause we have as yet few remains in 
Central India except the Chaturbhuj rock-temple at Gw&liar, 
to fill up the gap between Chandrivatt and Gw&liar, in Orissa 
the series is complete, and, if properly examined and described, 
would afford a consecutive history of the style from say 800 to 
1100 or 1200 A.D. 

1 fiBitntnglMm, ut supra, plate 90 and Architecture,’ plate 4. 
pp. 363, J63. * Sir L. Grim, ‘ Famoni Monnmenti,* 

* A'View of tbif temple will be found ut supra, pp, 62-69, and plate 40. 
in my ‘ I’ictoreiqne Illuatrations of Indian 



Chap. IV. KHAJURAHO. 141 

Next in interest and extent to the Bhuvanerwar group is 
that at Khajur&ho, the old capital of the Chandellas, in 
Bundelkhand, as before mentioned^ (p. 49). At this place, 
about 150 miles south-east from Gw&liar, there are now to be 
found some thirty important temples, all of which, with the 
exception of the Chausath Jogint and the Ganthai, described 
when treating of Jaina architecture, are of nearly the same age. 
Nor is it difficult, from their style and from the inscriptions, to 
see what that age was. The inscriptions range from A.D. 954 to 
A.D. 1002 ; ‘ and though it is not always clear to what particular 
temple they apply, we shall not probably err much if we assign 
the whole twenty-eight temples enumerated to the century 
beginning 950 and ending 1050, with a margin of a few years 
either way. What renders this group more than usually inter- 
esting is, that the Khajuriho temples are divided between the 
three great Indian religions : about one-third being Jaina, one- 
third Vaishnava, and the remainder 5 'aiva ; and all being nearly 
contemporary, it conveys an impression of toleration that pre- 
vailed at that period. In each group there is one or more 
larger temples with smaller ones scattered about. In the 5 aiva 
class it is the Khandarya Mah&deva, and in the Vaishnava 
series it is the Chaturbhuja or Rdmachandra. 

A curious result of this toleration or community of feeling is, 
that the architecture of all the three groups is so similar that, 
looking to it alone, no one could say to which of the three 
religions any particular temple belonged. It is only when their 
sculptures are examined that their original destination becomes 
apparent, and even then there are anomalies which it is difficult 
to explain. A portion, for instance, of the sculptures of the 
principal 5 aiva temple — the Kandarya Mah&deva — are of a 
grossly indecent character ; ® which is understood to be com- 
paratively rare in 5 aiva temples, but not unusual on Vaishnava 
shrines. But here the fact may be added to many others to 
prove how mixed together the various sects were even at that 
time, and how little antagonistic they then were to each other. 

The general character of these temples may be gathered 
from the annexed representation (Woodcut No. 341) of the 
great 5 aiva temple, the Kandarya Mah&deva. As will be seen 
from the plan (Woodcut No. 342), it is 109 ft. in length, by 60 ft. 

1 We are indebted to Gen. Cunning- pboti^aphs of the temples are given 
ham for most of our information about in Griffin’s ‘ Famous Monuments, plates 
this place, and it is from his * Reports * 48 - 57 >' , . , , . 

and from photographs that the following • • Epigraphia Indica,’ vol. i. pp. 121- 
account has been chiefly compiled. — 151. . . , r. 

'Archaeological Reports,* vol. ii. pp. 412- * Cunningham, * Archaeological Survey 

438 ; vol. vii. pp. 41, 42, 55-58 ; vol. x. Reports,* vol. ii. p. 420. 

^ 16-213 and voL xxi. pp. 55-69. Ten 



NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 








Chap. IV. 


SINNAR. 


*43 


in breadth over all, and externally rises 1 16 ft. above the ground, 
and 88 ft. above its own floor. Its basement, or perpendicular 
part, is, like all the great temples here, sur- 
rounded by three rows of sculptured figures. 

General Cunningham counted 872 statues 
on and in this temple, ranging from 2^ ft. 
to 3 ft. in height, or about half life-size, 
and they are mixed up with a profusion 
of vegetable forms and conventional details 
which defy description. The vim&na, or 
tower, it will be observed, is built up of 
smaller repetitions of itself, which became 
at this age one of the favourite modes of 
decoration, and afterwards an essential 
feature of the style. Here it is managed 
with singular grace, giving great variety 
and play of light and shade, without un- 
necessarily breaking up the outline. The 
roof of the porch, as seen in front, is a 
little confused, but as seen on the flank 
it rises pleasingly step by step till it abuts 
against the tower, every part of the internal 
arrangement being appropriately distin- 
guished on the exterior. 

If we could compare the design of the Gwdliar temple 
(Woodcut No. 339) with that of this building, we cannot 
but admit that the former is by far the most elegant, but on 
the other hand the richness and vigour of the Mah&deva 
temple redeems its want of elegance and fascinates in spite 
of its somewhat confused outline. The Gw&liar temple is 
the legitimate outcrop of the class of temples that originated 
in the Great Temple at Bhuvanerwar, while the Kandarya 
Mah&deva exhibits a complete development of that style of 
decoration which resulted in continued repetition of itself' on 
a smaller scale to make up a complete whole. Both systems 
have their advantages, but on the whole the simpler seems to 
be preferable to the more complicated mode of design. 

SiNNAR, AMBARNAtH, AND UDAYAPUR. 

The examples already given will perhaps have sufficed to 
render the general form of the Indo-Aryan temple familiar to 
the reader, but as no two are quite like one -another, their 
variety is infinite. There is one form, however, which became 
very fashionable about the iith century, and continued to a 
much later date, and is so characteristic that it deserves some 
illustration. 



3t»- 

Plan of Kandarya 
Mahd.deva, KhajurAho. 
(From a Plan by Gen. 
Cunningham.) 
Scale 50 ft. to X in. 



144 NORTHERN OR INDaARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 

A fairly representative example occurs in the temple of 
Gondervara at Sinnar, about i8 miles from Nftsik. The plan, 
(Woodcut Na 343), and the view, Plate XXV., will illustrate the 



343- Temple of Gondenrara at Sianar, 

Scale 100 ft. to 1 in. 

arrangement and style of the temple, which belongs probably 
to the early part of the 12th century. About the nth century 
a Yidava dynasty of petty kings seems to have ruled oyer 
the present N&sik district, and possibly had a seat here.^ 
To them the erection of this temple is ascribed. It stands, 
outside the town, in a walled enclosure measuring inside 284 
ft. from north to south by 314 ft. from east to west, with 
entrance gateways on the east and south. It is placed on a 
raised platform, 124 ft. by 94 ft., with the Nandi pavilion in 
front and four small shrines at the comers.* Except the 
crowning members of the rikhara, and the porches, the temple 

> 'iDdiaa Antiaouv,’ voL jdi. pp. north-west is dedicated to Ganeia. that 
iip-iap; 'Epapi^ Indica,’ voL il, pp. on the north-east to Nlrtvana, that on 

**7'JHS* 59' *o«th-ea8t to Sfiira, and on the 

* Thu arrangement is called a '.Shiva- sonth-west to Flrvatt or Mahishlsiiri- 
rancfal^ana’ ; the small dnrine on the mardant. 




Chap. IV, 


SINNAR. 


US 


is in good preservation.^ The mandap is 21 ft 9 in. square 
with fop highly sculpurol pillars and respondent pilasters 
supporting the roof, which is of somewhat peculiar construction, 
as mdicated in the section (Woodcut No. 344). The centrsJ 
square area is carried up as a dome to a height of 19 ft richly 
carved ; and the surrounding aisles have sloping roofs, also 



344. Crosf-ioction of Gondeiwa Temple at Sinnar. 

Scale 90 ft. to X in. 

elaborately sculptured, whilst the front and side porches are in 
keeping with rich carving. 

The shrine with its nkhara, as will be seen from the plan 
and view, have the laigest dimension through the centres of 
the opposite faces, the comers being suppres.sed by a series 
of smaller angles crossing them. The spire has then a band 
carved in fine diaper pattern on each face running up to its 
summit ^d the flanks are ornamented in a way not met with 
in earlier temples, and differing from both the Northern and 
the Chalukyan styles. The whole contrasts . with the ■ oldp 
form illustrated by the surrounding smaller temples (seen in 
Plate No. XXV.). All the outer walls of the temple are covered 

^ The modem Marftthi finial placed od nfttb at Pattadakal. (Ant*, WoodcntNa 
thetowermay be a mde imitation of the 309); oompam Woodcnt No. 345. It baa 
■ort of globe that enwoad some of the recently been replaced by a fimal copied 
lndo>Ai7aatemidet,tf.g’.,tbatof6alaga. ftom another similar temple. 




NORTMERI^ or moO-ARVAN STYLE. Rook Vt. 


146 

with carving of great delicacy, in which figure sculpture is kept 
comparatively subordinate ? The outer roof bears a trace of its 
descent from early Chalukyan temples.^ The four small shrines 
are in the usual Indo-Aryan style and richly sculptured. 



345* Temple at Udayapur, in Gw&liar territory. 


* The section, Woodcat No. 344, from not be had to the interior in this case 
Mr. H. Cousen's survey drawing, shows the representation is conjectural, but 
the roof as hollow or doulde. This is the founded on the example 01 die Ambar- 
case in all these structures, and indeed in nith temple.—* Indian Antiquary,* vol. 
most Hindd temples. But as access could iii. p. 316, and and 3rd plates. 




Crap. IV. 


ODAYAPUR 


*47 


Another example, fortunately in a more perfect state, is at 
a place called Udayapur, about 40 miles north-north-east from 
Bhils& in the Gw&liar territory. As will be seen from the 
woodcut (No. 345) the porch is covered, as at Sinnar, with a low 
pyramidal roof placed diagonally on the substructure, and rising 
in steps, each of which is ornamented with vases or urns of 
varying shapes. The tower is ornamented by four flat bands, of 
great b^uty and elegance of design, tetween each of which are 
thirty-flve little repetitions of itself, placed one above the other 
in five tiers, the whole surmounted by an amalanli, and a vase 
of very elegant design. As every part of this is carved with 
great precision and delicacy, and as the whole is quite perfect at 
the present day, there are few temples of its class which give a 
better idea of the style than this one. From an inscription 
copied in 1840, and translated by a pandit, it was believed that 
this temple was erected in A.D. 1059 ; but though the inscription 
is of doubtful value, other inscriptions prove that Uday&ditya 
Pramira was ruling in 1080,* and the style points to the latter 
part of the i ith century. 

At Kalyan, near Bombay, there is a temple called Ambarn&th 
very similar to this, drawings and casts from which were made 
by orders of the Bombay government, in 1869.* It is, however, 
in a very ruinous state, and even when perfect could never have 
been equal to this one at Udayapur, and to many others in 
the Presidency. In it there is an inscription, dated in the 
5 'aka year 983, or A.D. 1060.* It thus accords in age with all 
else we know of the style. 

It measures about 84 ft. in length over all by 61 through 
the side porches, and consists of a cella and a mandap, 23 ft. 
square, the roof of the hall supported by four richly sculptured 
pillars, with a small dome in the middle, as at Sinnar, and all 
the ceiling elaborately carved. There are entrance porches 
on three sides — each with a lobby in the depth of the 
walls which are 1 1 ft. 8 in. thick at these points. A stair 
descends into the shrine, which is 13 ft. square, its floor being 
7 ft. 9 in. below that of the mandap — which is an exceptional 
arrangement in 5 aiva temples, — though several instances occur. 
The temples also mostly face the east, this one the west. The 
richness of its exterior may be judged of from the photo- 
graphic illustration (Plate XXVI.). Unfortunately it is now in 
a very ruinous condition. 

' * Journal of the Asiatic Society of South Kensington Museum. Transcripts 
Bengal,’ vol. ix. p. 548 ; 'Journal of the from fifteen of the drawings were 
American Oriental Society,” vol. vii. p. published in the 'Indian Antiquary,’ vol. 
53 ; Duffs 'Chronology of India, ’p. 131 lii. (1874), pp. 3i6fr. 
and refs. ’ 'Journal of Bombay Br. Royal 

* A portion of the casts are in the Asiatic Society,’ vol. xii. p. 329. 



148 NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 

Hem&dpantt temples, as they are called, are pretty numerous 
in Ber&r, the central districts of the Bombay Presidency and 
the northern parts of the Haidar&bid territory — districts that 
belonged to the Oevagiri kingdom of the 12 th and 13th 
centuries, to which they seem mostly to belong. But the 
style is found to have prevailed far beyond the limits of that 
state, and even at an earlier date. From the later temples at 
least, in Ber&r and Khandesh,the mythological representations on 
the outer walls had disappeared, and geometrical carvings had 
taken their place. Only upon the older ones — usually much 
ruined — as at Lon&r, do we find bands of figure sculpture round 
the mandap.i 

NAgdA. 

Near the great temple of Eklingajt, about 12 miles north 
from Udaypur, is a group of scarcely known temples, that seem 
to range from the 1 2th century, if not earlier, to the 15 th. They 
are on the western margin of the B&ghelft-tal&o, a large artificial 
lake, and belong to the remains of the ancient city of Nigd& or 
N&gahrad, extending for about a mile in length. The temples 
are of white marble and belong to both the Jaina and Hindfi 
religions, and form one of the most remarkable series on this side 
of India. Though the place is quite .deserted and the temples 
much dilapidated, and whilst the sculptures have in many cases 
been much 'mutilated, they are of great beauty, and compare 
not unfavourably with those at Abfi.® The finest here are two 
Vaishnava temples, known as Sds-bahfi,* standing, with other 
smaller shrines, on a raised platform or terrace. Below the 
terrace on the east is a handsome swing torana with four 
pillars in line. This is in front of the Bahfi temple, which is 
the smaller and plainer of the two. Its mandap or portico 
iS' open and square, with extensions on the three sides, from 
which project the entrances, and is surrounded by a low screen 
wall on which stand fourteen short pillars supporting the roof. 


’ Forty years ago Major Gill made a 
tour through parts of West Beiir, photo- 
paphing the lleniidpantt temples at 
S&keg^n, Jaypur'Kotli, Aradipur, Sir* 
pur, Mehkar, &ndutjana. Lonir, Dhotii 
and ^tglon. I expanded his brief notes 
for him into a somewhat detailed account ; 
this he somewhat abridged and altered, 
a^ it was then printed in the ‘ Proceed- 

•’Feb. 

notes 

. . Antiquarian 

Remains in Bombay Presidency * (1885), 
pp. 236 > 34 I. 


The editor paid a very hurried visit 
to them early in 1873. >-* Architecture and 
Scenery in Gujarat and Raipntana,’ pp. 
38, 39, and plates 15, 16. j 5 r. Le Bon, 
during his tour in 1884, visited them, and 
published photographs of the Hindoli 
torana or swinging arch, and three each 
of the Sisu and Mbft temples, which he 
mistakenly calls ‘ Banka ’ and ' Sasouka ’ 
or ' Sahaskot’ respectively. — ‘ Les Monu- 
menu de I'lnde,’ pp. 105-107, and figs. 
iii-iiS. 

* ' Mother and daughter-in-law,’ as at 
Gwaliar. 



Chap. IV. 


NAGDA. 


*49 


and so arranged that upon six of them — the inner pairs at each 
entrance — with two columns before the lobby of the shrine, 
the central dome rests. This is a somewhat exceptional but 
not altogether unusual arrangement. The shafts of the short 
pillars are 32* sided changing to round, and the two inner 
pillars are octagon below, then 16-sided and round above. 

The dome is very richly carved and ornamented by eight 
female figures supported on brackets, whilst blocks over the 
pillars at the joinings of the lintels bear figures of the eight 
m&trts or divine mothers. The screen wall is elaborately 
sculptured outside in a bold clear style, and is in a fair state 
of preservation. The shrine walls are very plain, and the 
rikhara is of brick — but of it the east face is ruined. 

A small temple of Mahideva or Siva, facing the south, 
stands on the platform a few yards to the south-east of this, 
consisting of a porch with two advanced pillars, and the shrine 
surmounted by a low spire of early style covered with carving ; 
but the front has partly fallen away.' There are also three or 
four other temples surrounding the Bahfi temple. 

The S&su temple is the larger of the two and its hall is closed, 
with a porch and doorway on the. east and lattice windows in 
projecting bays — about 4 ft. g in. deep on the north and south 
sides— carved in a very elaborate and unusual style. The hall, 
exclusive of these recesses, is 23 ft. square fnside, aiid its’ roof 
is upheld by four massive pillars of the style of those in Vimala’s 
temple at AbO, and in many old Hindi! temples, as at Ambarnith. 
These pillars are connected by heavy toran arches, and the 
central area is covered by a richly carved dome with four 
brackets on the sides that once supported dancing figures. The 
other compartments of the roof are filled with intricate sculptures, 
but all are much besmeared with smoke. The entrance and 
roof of the front porch are covered with carving, and by the 
sides of the doorway are perforated screens; but the outside 
of the shrine is very plain — only the niches on the west, north 
and south, respectively, have images of Vishnu, Brahnii and 
5 iva. The rikhara and roof of the mandap are now mere heaps 
of brick. There is no image in the shrine nor any inscription 
to indicate the age of the temple, and it can only be tentatively 
ascribed to the 14th .century : possibly it may be a little earlier 
and the Bahfi shrine later. 

There is another pair of Vaishnava temples here, the smaller 
of which is covered with carving and has a pretty torana close 
in front of the entrance which foces north. The hall is square, 
and the upper portion of its walls is carved in panels filled 
with geometrical patterns such as were used in Muhammadan 

* ' Aicbitectnre of Gujarat and Rajputana,’ plate 16, ri^ht aide, 



NORTHERN OR INDaARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 


ISO 


mosque and tomb windows in the 15 th century and sub* 
sequently. There are also several Jaina temples among the 
ruins of Nftgdft — one dedicated to P&rjwan&th in 1429, and 
another called Adbudhajfs erected in 1437 in the reign of 
Kumbhakama, and further, a number of others of somewhat 
smaller dimensions of which, like the preceding, the sculptures 
are much injured, as well as parts of the structures, but which 
are of considerable interest and some of them of architectural 
beauty and importance. But until we have detailed surveys 
of them, these temples cannot be satisfactorily described.' 

Chitorgadh. 



One other illustration must complete what we now have to 
say r^arding these Indo-Aryan temples. It is one of the most 
modem of the style, having been erected by Miri B&t, the wife 
of Kumbha R&n^l of Chitor (ad. 1418-1468). Kumbha was, as 
is well known, a patron of the Jains ; in his time was erected the 
temple at R&npur (Woodcut No. 288) and the Ktrtti-stambha at 
Chitor (Woodcut No. 296). But he was an orthodox HindA, 
and here we find him and his wife erecting in their capital two 
temples dedicated to Vishnu. The king’s temple, 
which is close by, is very much smaller than this 
one, for which his wife gets credit. In plan, 
the only peculiarity is that the pradakshina, 
or procession-path round the cella, is here an 
open colonnade, with little pavilions at the four 
corners, and this is repeated in the portico in 
3 ^' , . the manner shown in the annexed diagram 

“T!:?i2rr”(Woodcat no . 346). 

portico, in the form of a 
pyramid, is placed diagonally as at Udayapur, 
while the tower itself is of so solid and unbroken 
an outline, that it might at first sight be ascribed to a much 
earlier date than the isth century (Woodcut No. 347). When, 
however, it is closely looked at, we miss the frequent amalaka 
bands and other ornamental features of earlier times, and the 
crowning members are more unlike those of ancient temples. 
The curve, too, of its outline is regular from base to summit, 
and consequently feebler than that of the older examples ; but 
taking it sul in all, it certainly is more like an ancient temple 
than any other of its age I am acquainted with. It was a 
revival, the last expiring effort of a style that was dying out, 
in that form at least. 


^ The above is based on notes made I the ‘Progress Report of the Archaeological 
in 18731 nn Dr. G. Lebon's photc^raphs, I SurA'ey of India, Western Circle’ for 
and on the photographs and brief notes in ] 1904-1905, 
the report of Mr. D. R. Bliindftrkar in | 



Chap. IV. 


VI5VE.SWAR, BENARES. 


*S* 


Vi.fVE.swAR, Benares. 

If you ask a Brfthman of Benares to point out to you the 
most ancient temple of his city, he inevitably leads you to the 



Temple of Vriji, Chitor. (From a Photograph. ) 


VLrverwar,^ as not only the most holy, but the oldest of its 
sacred edifices. Yet it is known, and cannot be disputed, 
that the temple, as it now stands, was erected from the^ founda- 
tion in the i8th century, to replace one of Klrtti Vijvcfwar, 

I YiiTCJwara or Virvanfilha— ** the lord of the universe” is the name under which 
5iva is wordlipped at Benares. 


iSa NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 

that had been thrown down and desecrated by the bigot 
Aurangzib. This he did (in 1659) in order that he might 
erect on the most venerated spot of the Hindds his mosque, 
whose tall minarets still rear their heads in insult over all 
the Hindd buildings of the city. As has already been remarked 
(page 87), there is hardly any great city in Hindustan that can 
show so few evidences of antiquity as Benares. The Buddhist 
remains now existing at S&mdth hardly can be said to belong 



348. Tenufde of Vijvejwa r. (From Prinsep’s * Views in Benares. ) No Scale. 

to the city. It must be rememberec;) that the iconoclastic zeal 
of the Muhammadans was ever ready to burst forth against the 
fanes of HindO idolatry. And after the defeat of Jayachandra 
of Kanauj, in 1 194, Benares fell into the hands of Mu’izzu-d-' 



Chap, IV. TEMPLE OF SINDHIA’S MOTHER, GWALIAR. 153 

dtn GhQrt, and the duty of the governor was to dispense 
Muhammadan law, and specially to repress idolatry. We can 
understand what this meant for the old shrines ; and during the 
next 350 years, the city was repeatedly subjected to pillage. In 
the 1 5th century it was under the rule of the Sharqt rulers of 
Jaunpur, and in the later struggles between the Mughals and 
Afgh&ns it frequently suffered severely, and, in fact, till the 
time of Akbar the ostensible support of Hinduism was forcibly 
restrained. The city, as rebuilt after each disaster, apparently 
shifted its site in a south-westerly direction, probably helped 
to some extent by changes of the course of the river. And 
after such a history one could hardly expect to find many 
traces of its ancient architecture, though much may still fate 
buried between the present city and S&mdth. Even the temple 
of Ktrtti Vijverwar, which Aurangzib destroyed, was not a very 
ancient structure. When desecrated it was the principal, and 
probably the most splendid, edifice of its class in ^e city. 
Now there is no material evidence that ‘any important building 
now remaining was erected there before the time of Akbar (a.d. 
1556-1605). 

The present temple is a double one : two towers or spires 
almost exactly duplicates of each other. One of these is 
represented in the preceding woodcut (No, 348), and they are 
connected by a porch, crowned by a dome borrowed from the 
Muhammadan style, which, though graceful and pleasing in 
design, hardly harmonises with the architecture of the rest of 
the temple. The spires are each 51 ft. in height, and covered 
with ornament to an extent quite sufficient even in this style. 
The details too are all elegant, and sharply and cleanly cut, 
and without any evidence of vulgarity or bad taste; but they 
are feeble as compared with the more ancient examples, and 
the forms of the pyramidal parts have lost that expression of 
power and of constructive propriety which were so evident 
in the earlier stages of the art. It is, however, curiously 
characteristic of the style and place, that a building, barely 
50 ft. in length, and the same in height, should be the principal 
temple in the most sacred city of the HindOs, and equally so 
that one hardly 200 years old should be considered as the 
most ancient, while it is only that which marks this most holy 
spot in the religious cosmogony of the Hindds. 

Temple of Sindhia’s Mother, GwAliar. 

One more example must suffice to explain the ultimate 
form which the ancient towers of the Orissan temples had 
reached in the 19th century. It was erected about forty years 
Rgo by the mother of Jay&j! R&o Sindhia, Mah&tija of G«&liar 



*54 


NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 


and to it was added a tomb or cenotaph either by herself or 
her son. As will be seen from the woodcut (No. 349) it is 
eluant, though feeble as compared with ancient examples. 
The Muhammadan dome appears in the background, and the 
curved Bengali roof in the pavilion in front. The most striking 



349. Temple of Sindhia's Mother, Gwftliar. (From a Photograph.) 


peculiarity of the style is that the .rikharas have nearly lost 
the graceful curved form, which is the most marked peculiarity 
of all the ancient examples. As has already been remarked, 
the straight-lined pyramid first appears in the Takht-i-Sulaimfln 
temple in Kashmir, where its introduction was probably 
hastened by the wooden straight-lined roofs of the original 




Chap. IV. 


BRINDABAN. 


*SS 


native style. It is equally evident, liowever, in a temple 
which Chait Singh, the Rdja of Benares, erected at -Rftmnagar 
in the end of the i8th or beginning of the 19th century. Since 
that time the tendency has been more and more in that 
direction, and if not checked, the probability is that the curve 
will very soon be entirely lost. To a European eye, accustomed 
only to our straight-lined spires, that may seem hardly a matter 
for regret; but to any one educated in Eastern forms it can 
scarcely appear doubtful that these spires will lose half their 
charm if deprived of the graceful curved outline they have so 
long retained. 

In order not to interrupt the story of the gradual develop- 
ment of the style, the history has b^n brought down to the 
present day in as nearly a consecutive manner as possible, 
thus anticipating the dates of several temples. It seems 
expedient, however, in any history that this should be done, 
for few things of its class are more interesting; than to trace 
the progressive changes by which the robust form of the 
Pararurimerwar temple at Bhuvanerwar, or of the great 
temple there, became changed into the feeble elegance of the 
Virverwar or GwAliar temples. The few examples that can be 
adduced in such a work as this may not suffice to make this so 
clear to others as it is to myself. With twenty or thirty 
examples it could be made self-evident, and that may one day 
be done, and this curious chapter in architectural history be thus 
added to the established sequences which every true style of 
art affords. Meanwhile, however, it is necessary to go back a 
little to mention one or two aberrant types which still are not 
without interest. 


BrindAban. 

Whether the Moslims wantonly threw down most of the 
temples of the Hindus or not, it is evident that the first three 
centuries of Muhammadan rule in India were singularly unfavour- 
able for the development of HindA art in any part of the country 
where their rule was firmly established. With the tolerant reign 
of Akbar, however, a new state of affairs was inaugurated. Not 
only was he himself entirely devoid of religious bigotry, but 
most— or at least the most — eminent of his ministers and 
friends were Hindis, and he lent an attentive ear to the Roman 
Catholic missionaries who frequented his court. But, besides 
its tolerance, his reign was marked by a degree of prosperity 
and magnificence till then unknown during that of any other 
Indian sovereign of his religion. Not only are his own 
buildings unrivalled in their extent and magnificence, but he 
encouraged all those around him to follow his example, and 



NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STTYLE. Book VI. 



156 

found, among others, a most apt imitator in the celebrated 
M4n Singh of Amber, afterwards of Jaypur, who reigned 
A.D. 1 592* 161 5. In 1590 he erected at Brind&ban, 5 miles 

C north of Mathur&, a temple, of Govind- 
deva or Krishna, which either he left 
_ unfinished at his death ; or, as is related, 
“ the .rikhara of it was thrown down by 
Aurangzib, who is said to have erected 
also an 'Ib&dat-gah, or place for Moslim 
prayer, on the roof.* It is one of the 
most interesting and elegant temples in 
India, and the only one, perhaps, from 
which a European architect might borrow 
a few hints. 

The temple, as it now stands, consists of 
a cruciform porch, internally nearly quite 
perfect, though externally it is not clear 
how it was intended to be finished (Wood- 
cuts Nos. 350, 351).® The antarMa or 
inner mandap of the original temple was 
afterwards apparently converted into a 
shrine, and is perfect internally — and used for worship — but 
the dkhara is gone, having been destroyed along with the 
cella ; after which the antardla was made into a shrine.^ 
Though not large, its dimensions are respectable, the porch 
measuring 117 ft. east and west, by 105 ft. north and south, 
and is covered by a true vault, built with radiating arches — 
the only instance, except one, known to exist in a Hindi! 
temple in the north of India. On each side of the original 
shrine are two side chapels. Over the four arms of the 
cross the vault is plain, and of 23I ft. span, but in the centre 
it expands to 35 ft., and is quite equal in design to the best 
Gothic vaulting known. It is the external design of this 
temple, however, which is most remarkable. The angles are 
accenfuated with singular force and decision, and the openings, 
which are more than sufficient for that climate, are picturesquely 
arranged and pleasingly divided. It is, however, the combina- 
tion of vertical with horizontal lines, covering the whole surface, 
that forms the great merit of the design. This is, indeed, not 


,50. Plan of Temple at 
Brind&ban. 

(By Capt. Cole.) 
Scale TOO ft. to i in. 


^ It consisted of a wall like an * Id-gah/ 
as seen in Woodcut No. 351 ; this was 
removed during repairs in 1S73. 

s Mr. Growse oelieved that it was 
intended to be finished with five spires — 
over the shrine, the antardla, the aome of 
the mandap, and on each of the attached 


chapels. — ‘Mathura,’ anded. pp. 223-224. 

^ The original image is said to have 
been removed to Jaypur. The cella was 
roughly rebuilt in orick behind this, about 
1854, and dedicated to Krishna. — 
Growse’s ‘ Mathura,’ 2nd ed. pp, 223- 
224. 



Chap. IV. 


BRINDABAN 


*57 


peculiar to this temple ; but at Bhuvanerwar, Halebtd, and 
elsewhere, the whole surface is so overloaded with ornament as 



351. View of Govind-deva Temple at Brind&ban. (From a Photograph.) 


to verge on bad taste. Here the accentuation is equal, but 
the surfaces are comparatively plain, and the effect dependent 
on the elegance of the profile of the mouldings rather than on 
the extent of the ornamentation. Without elaborate drawings 
it would be difficult to convey a correct impression of this ; but 
the view on next page (Woodcut No. 352) of a balcony, with its 
accompaniments, will suffice to illustrate what is meant. The 
figures might as well be omitted ; being carved where Moslim 
influences had long been strong, they are the weakest part of 
the design. 

There are other three temples at Brindiban, much in the 
same style and of the same period, but also much ruined. 
They were raised through the influence of the Gosains or 
disciples of Chaitanya and, consequently, all dedicated to 
Krishna under his various names — as Madan Mohan, Gopin^th, 
and Jugal Kishor. The erection of the last, represented on 
Plate XXVII., is referred to 1627, in the reign of Jahangir. 
Its plan is given in Woodcut No. 353, but the outer porch 
has entirely disappeared, and what is left is only the ardha- 



iS8 NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 

mandap and shrine. It faces the east, and the inandap, 17^ ft. 



353. Balcony in Temple of Govind-deva, BrindAban. (From a Photograph.) 

square inside, has also entrances on the north and south, with 

closets in the side 
walls which are 5 ft. 
9 in. thick. The 
cella is about 16 ft. 
square inside, with 
recesses for images 
outside it is octa- 
gonal in plan with 
the angles broken 
up so as to make 
it almost circular. 
Above the level of 
the mandap roof the nkhara tapers upwards wiih three string 

‘ From a drawing by the Archaeological Survey of India. 








Chap. IV. 


KANTANAGAR. 


>59 


courses, and is crowned by an amalajtll' It may be noted that 
the doors had all been arranged to slide back into slits provided 
in the walls. 

The other vaulted temple, above alluded to, is that of 
Harideva, at Govardhan, t2 miles west from Mathur4, and 
built by Raja Bhagwandis of Amber, under the same tolerant 
influence during the reign of Akbar. It is a plain edifice 135 ft. 
long by 35 ft. in width externally, and both in plan and design 
singularly like those early Romance churches that are constantly 
met with in the south of France, belonging to the nth and 12th 
centuries. If, indeed, the details are not too closely looked 
into, it might almost pass muster for an example of Christian 
art at that age,> while except in scale the plan of the porch at 
firindaban bears a most striking resemblance to that of St. Front 
at Perigeux.* The similarity is accidental, of course ; but it is 
curious that architects so distant in time and place should hit 
so nearly on the same devices to obtain certain desired effects. 

KAntanagar. 

In addition to the great Indo-Aryan style of temple- 
building described above, there are a number of small aberrant 
types which it might be expedient to describe in a more 
extensive work ; but, except one, none of them seem of suffi- 
cient importance to require illustration in a work like the 
present. The exceptional style is that which grew up in 
Bengal proper, and is practised generally in the province at the 
present day. It may have existed from an early date, but no 
very old examples are known, and it is consequently impossible 
to feel sure alraut this. Its leading characteristic is the bent 
cornice, copied from the bambu huts of the natives. To under- 
stand this, it may be as well to explain that the roofs of the 
huts in Bengal are formed of two rectangular frames of bambus, 
perfectly flat and rectangular when formed, but when lifted from 
the ground and fitted to the substructure they are bent so that 
the elasticity of the bambu, resisting the flexure, keeps all the 
fastenings in a state of tension, which makes a singularly firm 
roof out of very frail materials. It is the only instance I 
know of elasticity being employed in building, but is so 
singularly successful in attaining the desired end, and is so 
common, that we can hardly wonder when the Bengalis turned 

^ The Tower of the Madan Muhan Muttra and Agra’ '(1873), to which and 
temple is of the same form, but very Growse’s ’Mathura' (1880) the reader 
richly carved. Infra^ p. 161, note 2. is referred. 

^ Both the Govind-deva and Harideva * ‘ History of Ancient and Medieval 
temples are illustrated in Lieut. H. H. Architecture,’ 3rd ed. vol. ii. Woodcut 
Cole's ’ Illustrations of Building near No. 562, p. 64. 



i6o NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 
their attention to more permanent modes of building they should 



3S4. Temple at K&atanagar. (From a Photograph.) 

have copied this one. It is nearly certain that it was employed 
for the same purposes before the Muhammadan sovereignty, as 



Chap. IV. AMRITSAR. i6i 

it is found in all the mosques at Gabr and M&ldi; but we 
do not know of its use in Hindil temples till afterwards, though 
now it is extremely common all over northern India. 

One of the best examples of a temple in this style is that 
at K&ntanagar, 12 miles from the station of Din&jpur. It 
was commenced in A.D. 1704 and finished in 1722.^ As will be 
seen from the preceding illustration (Woodcut No. 354), it is a 
nine-towered temple, of considerable dimensions, and of a 
pleasingly picturesque design, The centre pavilion is square, 
and, but for its pointed form, shows clearly enough its descent 
from the Orissan prototypes; the other eight are octagonal, 
and their form suggests, as its origin, a number of bambus 
arranged in a circle or polygon, with their heads bent together 
and cords binding them horizontally at equal intervals.* The 
pointed arches that prevail throughout are certainly derived 
from Muhammadan originals, but the building being in brick 
their employment was inevitable. 

No stone is used in the building, and the whole surface is 
covered with designs in terra-cotta, partly conventional, and 
these are frequently repeated, as they may be without offence 
to taste ; but the bulk of them are figure-subjects, which do not 
ever seem to be repeated, and form a perfect repository of the 
manners, customs, and costumes of the people of Bengal at the 
beginning of the eighteenth century. In execution they display 
an immeasurable inferiority to the carvings on the old temples 
in Orissa or in Mysore, but for general effect of richness and 
prodigality of labour this temple may fairly be allowed to 
compete with some of the earlier examples. 

There is another and more ornate temple, in the same style 
at Gop&l-ganj,* close to Din^jpur, built in 1764, but in infinitely 
worse taste and now ruinous; and one known as the Black 
Pagoda, at Calcutta, and many others all through Lower 
Bengal ; but hardly any so well worthy of illustration as this 
one at Kintanagar. 

Amritsar. 

One other example may serve for the present to complete 
what we have to say regarding the temples of modern India. 

I Buchanan Hamilton, ‘ Eastern India,’ | and square rikharas, are found among the 
edited by Montgomery Martin, 18^7, j later jaina temples at Kundalpur in the 
vol. ii. p. 628. It is a V’aishnava temple. I Damoh district of the Central Provinces, 

® The turrets of these temples resemble at Sonagarh (Woodcut No. 297), and at 
somewhat the jikharas of Jugal Kishor Khajur&ho. — See Griffin’s ‘ Famous 
and Madan Mohan at Brindaban (Plate Monuments,* plate 51 ; or G. Le Bon, 
XXVII.), which the Dinajpur Maharaja ‘ Les Monuments del’Inde,*p. 89, fig. 80. 
had visited just before building his * Frontispiece to Buchanan Hamilton’s 
KSntanagar temple. Examples of this * Eastern India,* vol. ii. and pp. 626-627« 
form of construction, both for polygonal 



163 


NORTHERN OR INDO-ARYAN STYLE. Book VI. 


This time, however, it is no longer an idohshrine, but a mono- 
theistic place of prayer, and differs, consequently, most essentially 
from those we have been describing. The religion of the Sikhs 
appears to have been a protest alike against the gross idolatry 
of the Hindis and the inflexible monotheism of the Moslims. 
It does not, however, seem that temples or gorgeous ceremonial 
formed any part of the religious system propounded by its 
founders. Reading the ‘ Granth ’ and prayer are what were 



355* Golden Temple in the Sacred Tank at Amritsar, from the north-east. 


insisted upon, but even then not necessarily in public. We, 
in consequence, know but little of their temples, of which they 
seem to have but few. R&mdSs, the fourth Sikh Guru, or high 
priest, obtained a grant of the site of Amritsar from the 
tolerant Akbar, dug the tank, which is 170 yds. square, and 
began the temple, which was completed by his successor, 
Arjun. It was named Har-mandir, and stood in the middle of 
the tank ; but Ahmad Shdh AbdSit, on his return from P&ntpat 
in 1761. was opposed near Ludhidnfi by a Sikh army, which he 
signally defeated, and entering Amritsar blew up the Har- 


Chap. IV. 


AMRITSAR. 


163 

mandir with gunpowder and desecrated all their sacred places. 
The temple was rebuilt in 1766, probably on the same plan as 
well as on the site of the former. It stands on a platform 67 
ft. square, connected with the north side of the tank by a 
marble causeway 203 ft. in^ length ; the temple itself— 40 ft. 
4 in. square — is of two storeys, with a room on the roof, covered 
by the dome. Ranjtt Singh, after seizing the city in 1802, was 
too emulous of the wealth of his HindQ and Moslim subjects 
in this respect not to desire to rival their magnificence. He 
spent large sums on the Sikh temple, ornamenting its walls 
with marbles largely from JahSngtr’s tomb, and roofing it with 
copper gilt, and consequently we have the Golden Temple in 
the Sacred Tank at Amritsar — as splendid an example of its 
class as can be found in India, though neither its outline nor 
its details can be commended (Woodcut No. 355V It is useful, 
however, as exemplifying one of the forms which Indian temple- 
architecture assumed in the 19th century, and where, for the 
present, we must leave it. The Jains and Hindus may yet do 
great things in it, if they caa escape the influence of European 
imitation; but now that the sovereignty has passed from the 
Sikhs we cannot expect their priests or people tp indulge in a 
magnificence their religion does not countenance or encourage. 

At Nftnder, on the GodAvarl, midway between Aurang&bdd 
and Haidarflbid there is another Sikh Dehrfl or shrine. Here 
Govind Singh, the tenth and last of their Gurus or pontiffs, 
was stabbed by a Pathcln servant and died in 1708. It 
is built on the plan of the Amritsar temple, being of two 
storeys, with the dome, which, is over the square room in the 
centre of the structure, raised a storey higher. This inner room 
has silver plated doors on the four sides and contains the tomb, 
about which are arranged swords, spears, shields, and steel 
discuses, that arc worshipped by the Sikhs of the colony 
settled in the town, and by numerous pilgrims that visit the 
shrine, as having belonged to the Guru.* Round it is a corridor, 
as in many Muhammadan tombs, and the outer walls have a 
triple opening on each face, hung with curtains. In it the 
Granth is daily read and worshipped. 

^ In Ranjit Singh’s time the temple carried to Amritsar after his death by his 
acquired its present Sikh name of * Darkar disciple Banda Bairigt. A list of the 
Sihib.’ Sikh DehrSs and sacred places is given 

® Trumpp, ‘Adi Granth,* introd. in ‘Journal Asiat. Soc. Bengal,* vol. 
p. 96. The arrows of the Guru were xiv. pp. 394^*. 



CHAPTER V. 

CIVIL ARCHITECTURE. 

CONTENTS. 

Cenotaphs — Palaces at GwAliar, Chitor, Amber, Dig — Gh^ts- 
Reservoirs — Dams. 


Cenotaphs. 

As remarked above, one of the most unexpected peculiarities 
of the art, as practised by the inhabitants of southern India, 
is the absence of any attempt at sepulchral magnificence. As 
the Dravidians were essentially builders, we might expect that 
they should show some respect for the memories of their great 
men. It is,, however, even uncertain how far the cromlechs, 
dolmens, or sepulchral circles found all over the south of India 
can be said to belong to the Dravidians in a ruder stage of 
society, or whether they belong to some aboriginal tribes who 
may have adopted the language of the superior races without 
being able to change the instincts of their race. Even after 
they had seen how much respect the Muhammadans paid to 
departed greatness, they failed to imitate them in this peculiarity. 
It was otherwise in the north of India — not among the pure 
Aryans ; but in the Rajput states, where blood is less pure, 
they eagerly seized the suggestion offered by Muhammadan 
magnificence in this respect, and erected chhatris on the spots 
where their bodies had been burnt. Where, too, their widows, 
with that strange devotion which is a trait in the Hindu female’s 
character, had sacrificed themselves to what they conceived to 
to be their duty. 

In Rajputana every native capital has its Mah^satt, or place 
where the sovereigns of the state and their nearest relatives 
are burned with their wives. Most of these are appropriately 
situated in a secluded spot at some little distance from the 
town, and, the locality being generally chosen because it is 
rocky and well-wooded, it forms as picturesque a necropolis 
as is to be found anywhere. Of these, however, the most 



Chap. V. 


CENOTAPHS. 


*6S 

magnificent, and certainly among the most picturesque, is 
that of Udaypur, the capital of Mew&r and the chief of the 
Rcljput states still existing. Here the tombs exist literally 
in hundreds, of ail sizes, from the little domical canopy 
supported by four columns^to the splendid chhatri whose 



octagonal dome is supported by fifty-six, for it has been the 
necropolis of the race ever since they were expelled from the 
ancient capital at Chitorgadh by Akbar in 1568. All are 
crowned by domes, and all make more or less pretensions to 
architectural beauty ; while as they are grouped together as 


i66 


CIVIL ARCHITECTURE. 


Book VI. 


accident dictated, and interspersed with noble trees, it would 
be difficult to point out a more beautiful cemetery anywhere. 
Among the finest is that of Sangr&m-Singh II., one of the most 
illustrious of his race, who was cremated on this spot, with 
twenty-one of his wives, in A.D. 1734. As will be seen from 
the preceding Woodcut (No. 356), it is a fifty-six pillared portico, 
with one octagonal dome in the centre (^ide ante, vol. i.. 



■ Woodcut No. 179). The dome itself is supported on eight dwarf 

? illars, wMch, however, hardly seem sufficient for the purpose, 
'be architect seems to have desired to avoid all appearances of 




Chap. V, CENOTAPHS. 167 

that gloom or solemnity which characterise the contemporary 
tombs of the Moslims, but, in doing this, to have erred in the 
other direction. The base here is certainly not sufficiently 
solid for the mass it has to support; but the whole is so 
elegant, and the effect so pleasing, that it seems hypercritical 
to find fault with it, and difficult to find, even among 
Muhammadan tombs, anything more beautiful. 

He it was, apparently, who erected the cenotaph to the 
memory of his predecessor Amara Singh 11.(1699-1711). In 
style it is very similar to that last described, except that it 
possesses only thirty-two columns instead of fifty-six. It has, 
however, the same lofty stylobate, which adds so much to the 
effect of these tombs, but has also the same defect — that the 
dome is raised on eight dwarf pillars, which do not seem 
sufficient for the purpose.* 

Woodcut No. 357 represents a cenotaph in this cemetery 
with only twelve columns, which, mutatis mutandis, is identical 
with the celebrated tomb at Mylassa.^ The lofty stylobate, the 
twelve columns, the octagonal dome, and the general mode of 
construction are the same ; but the twelve or thirteen centuries 
that have elapsed between the construction of the two, and the 
difference of locality, have so altered the details that the like- 
ness is not at first sight easily recognisible. From the form of 
its dome it is evidently more modern than that last described ; 
it may, indeed, have been erected within the limits of the last 
century. 

To the right of the same woodcut is another cenotaph with 
only eight pillars, but the effect is so weak and unpleasing that 
it is hardly to be wondered at that the arrangement is so rare. 
The angle columns seem indispensable to give the design that 
accentuation and firmness which are indispensable in all good 
architecture. 

These last two illustrations, it will be observed, are practi- 
cally in the Jaina style of architecture ; for, though adopting 
a Muhammadan form, the RSnSs of Udaypur clung to the 
style of architecture which their ancestors had practised, and 
which under Kumbha Ran& had only recently become so famous. 
This gives them a look of greater antiquity than they are 
entitled to, for Udaypur was not the capital of the kingdom 
before the sack of Chitor in 1568 ; and nearly equally so that 
the Hindfls never thought of this mode of commemorating their 
dead till the tolerant reign of Akbar. He did more than all 
that had been done before or since to fuse together the anta- 

^ A view of this cenotaph is gi\en in - ‘History of Ancient and Medieval 
my ‘ Picturesque Illustrations of Ancient Architecture/ 3rd cd. vol. i. Woodcut 
Architecture in Hindostan/ plate 14. No. 242. 




PALACES. 


Chap. V. 


169 


gonistic feelings of the two religions into at least a superficial 
similarity. 

At Koti, about 50 miles N.N.W. from Jhilrflp&than, is a 
fine marble mausoleum erected in memory of the Mahir&o 
Umed Singh who died in 1819. It is of considerable size, and 
the taste shown in the rich surface decorations, as well as in the 
arrangement, is good. The style is more Muhammadan than 
Hindd, and the dome appears heavy for the supporting columns.^ 

Further north, where the Jaina style had not been used to 
the same extent at least as in the south-west, the Hindfls 
adopted quite a different style in their palaces and cenotaphs. 
It was much more of an arched style, and though never, so far 
as I know, using a true arch, they adopted the form of the 
foliated arch, which is so common in the palaces of Agra and 
Delhi, and in all the Mughal buildings. In the palace at Dig, 
and in the cenotaphs of Govardhan, this style is seen in great 
perfection. It is well illustrated, with all its peculiarities, in the 
preceding view of the tomb of Bakhta war Singh at Alwar, erected 
about 1815 (Woodcut No. 358). To a European eye, perhaps 
the least pleasing part will be the Bengali curved cornices 
alluded to in the last chapter ; but to any one familiar with the 
style, its employment gels over mahy difficulties that a straight 
line could hardly meet, and altogether it makes up with its 
domes and pavilions as pleasing a group of its class as is to be 
found in India, of its age at least. The tombs of the Bharatpur 
Rijas, Randhtr Singh and Baldeva Singh, at Govardhan, with 
the earlier one of Suraj Mai (about 1770) are similar to this one, 
but on a larger scale, and some of them being older, are in better 
taste ; but the more modern ones avoid most of the faults that 
are only too characteristic of the art in India at the present 
day, and some of them are very modern. One was in course of 
construction when I was there in 1839, and from its architect 
I learned more of the secrets of art as practised in the Middle 
Ages than I have learned from all the books I have since read. 
Another was commenced after the time of my visit, and it is 
far from being one of the worst buildings of its class. If one 
could only inspire the natives with a feeling of pride in their 
own style, there seems little doubt that even now they could 
rival the works of their forefathers. 

Palaces. 

Another feature by which the northern style is most 
pleasingly distinguished from the southern, is the number and 
beauty of the palaces, which are found in all the capitals of the 

^ A view of this is given on plate 23 of 'Architecture, etc., in Gujarat and 
Rajputana.* 



170 


CIVIL ARCHITECTURE. 


Book VI. 


native states, especially in Rajputana. These are seldom 
designed with much reference to architectural symmetry or 
effect, but are nevertheless always picturesque and generally 
most ornamental objects in the landscape where they are found. 
As a rule, they are situated on rocky eminences, jutting into 
or overhanging lakes or artificial pieces of water, which are 
always pleasing accompaniments to buildings of any sort in 
that climate ; and the way they are fitted into the rocks, or 
seem to grow out of them, frequently leads to the most 
picturesque combinations. Sometimes their bases are fortified 
with round towers or bastions, on whose terraces the palace 
stands ; and even when this is not the case, the basement is 
generally built up solid to a considerable height, in a manner 
that gives a most pleasing effect of solidity to the whole, how- 
ever light the superstructure may be, and often is. If to these 
natural advantages you add the fact that the high caste Hindi! 
is almost incapable of bad taste, and that all these palaces are 
exactly what they profess to be, without any affectation of 
pretending to be what they are not, or of copying any style, 
ancient or modern, but that best suited for their purposes — it 
will not be difficult to realise what pleasing objects of study 
these R&jput palaces really are. At the same time it will be 
easily understood how difficult it must be in such a work as this 
to convey any adequate idea of their beauty; without plans 
explaining'their arrangements, atid architectural details of their 
interior, neither their elegance nor appropriateness can be 
judged of. A palace is not like a temple — a simple edifice of 
one or two halls or cells, almost identical with hundreds of 
others ; but a vast congeries of public and private apartments 
grouped as a whole more for convenience than effect. 

Few of the palaces of India have escaped the fate of that 
class of edifice all the world over. Either they must be 
deserted and left to decay, which in India means rapid oblitera- 
tion, or they must be altered and modified to suit the require- 
ments of subsequent occupants, till little if anything remains of 
the original structure. This fate, so far as is known, has 
overtaken all the royal abodes that may have existed before 
the dark ages ; so much so, indeed, that no trace of them has 
been found anywhere. Even after that we look in vain for 
anything important before the 1 3th century. At Chitorgadh, for 
instance, where one of the earliest Rajput dynasties was 
established, there are buildings that bear the name of the 
Palace of the Mori, also known as Ratnasingh’s, but so altered, 
remodelled and ruined as to be unrecognisable as such. 

At Chitor no building of this class can with certainty be 



Chap. V. 


PALACES. 


171 






t^» CIVIL ARCHITECTURE. Book VI. 

said to have existed anterior to the sack of the place by 
’Aliu-d-Dtn in- 1303. The so-called palace of Bhim and 
Padmint, which remains perhaps unaltered, is a comparatively 
modem structure but small, with arched openings.^ The ruined 
palace of Kumbha Rilni (a.d. 1418-1468) in the same place is 
more grandiose, and shows some of that beauty of detail which 
characterises his buildings in general.* 

The latter palace, of which Woodcut No. 359 represents the 
plan, may afford some idea of the arrangements of one of these 
residences. The principal entrance (A), known as the SOraj 
Pol or Sun-gate, leads into an open court, with a shed (B) for 
a rhinoceros and other rooms to the left of the gateway. 
Opposite the entrance is the Dartkhin^, behind which is the Sflraj 
GokhrS (C), and to the right of it is an exit to (D) the SringSr- 
chaurl Mandir or shrine. Along the wall from this are the 
stables (H), beside a shrine of Gane^a (E), which is close to 
the living apartments (F) of the palace, and near these is (G) 
the zan&na. Outside this is a fortified wall (M,M), and a court 
separates the royal zan&na from (I) that of the heir-apparent, 
of whose palace (K,K) it forms part. Connected with his 
rooms is (J) a mandir or shrine, and outside this residence is 
also a large court divided off from the royal palace court, in 
an enclosure in a corner of which is a. ruined dwelling (N), 
whilst on ,the opposite side of the court is (L) a large cistern. 

The palaces at Chitor belonging to this dynasty were, how- 
ever, far surpassed, in extent at least, by those which Udaya- 
singh commenced at Udaypur, to which place he removed his 
capital after the third sack of Chitor by Akbar in 1568. It has 
not unfrequently been compared with the Castle at Windsor, 
and not inaptly, for both in outline and extent it is not unlike 
that palace, though differing so wonderfully in detail and in 
situation.* In this latter respect the Eastern has the advantage 
of the Western palace, as it stands on the verge of an extensive 
lake, surrounded by hills of great beauty of outline, and in the 
lake are *two island palaces, the Jag-new&s and Jag-mandir, 
which are more beautiful in their class than any similar objects 
I know of elsewhere.^ It would be difficult to find any scene 


^ A view of it is given in Tod’s * Raja- 
sthan, ’ vol. i. plate 267. Some parts 
have been misunderstood by the engraver, 
but on the whole it represents the build- 
ing fairly. A photo^ph is nven on 
plate 20 of * Scenery and Anmitecture 
in Gmarat and Rajputana.' 

" Two views of it are dven in 
Rousselet, 'LTnde des Rajiuis/ pp. 
232233. 


”G. Le Son’s ‘ Monuments de I’lnde,* 
figs. I 3 S-I 37 - 

^A view of one of these is given 
in Fergusson's ‘ Illustrations of Ancient 
Architecture in India,’ plate 15. Other 
illustra^ons will be found in * L’Inde 
des Rajahs,’ at pp. 185 et seqq, ; and 
* Scenery and Architecture in Gujarat 
and Rajputana,* plate 17. 



Chap. V. PALACES. 173 

where art and nature are so happily blended together, and 
produce so fairy-like an effect. Certainly nothing I know of 
so modern a date equals it. 

The palace at Bundi is of about the same modem age as 
that at Udaypur, and almost equals it in architectural effect. 
It is smaller, however, and its lake is less in extent, and has only 
temples standing on its islets, instead of palaces with their 
pavilions and gardens. Still, the mode in which it is placed on 
its hill, and the way in which its buildings gradually fade into 
the bastions of the hill above, are singularly picturesque even 
for this country, and the hills being higher, and the valleys 
narrower, the effect of this palace is in some respects even 
more imposing than that at Udaypur. 

There are, however, some twenty or thirty similar royal 
residences in Central India, all of which have points of interest 
and beauty: some for their extent, others for their locality, 
and some for their beauty in detail, but every one of which 
would require a volume to describe in detail. Two examples, 







360. Palace at DatiyA. (From a PhotograjA.) 

though among the least known, must at present suffice to 
illustrate their general appearance. 

That at Datiyi (Woodcut No. 360), in Bundelkhand, is a 





Palace at Urcha, Bundelkhand. (From a Photograph.) 


Chap. V. GWALIAR. 175 

large block of building over a hundred yards square, more 
regular than such buildings generally are, but still sufficiently 
relieved both in outline, and in the variety of detail applied to 
the various storeys, to avoid monotony, and with its gardens 
leading down to the lake and its tombs opposite, combine to 
make up an architectural scene of a singularly pleasing 
character. It was built about the beginning of the 17th century 
by Btr-Singh Deva, the Bundeli chief of Orchl^ It is built 
of granite and is raised on a vaulted terrace about 40 ft. in 
height ; the first two storeys extend over the whole area and 
their immense halls, with arched roofs supported by numerous 
pillars, are badly lighted, as they have windows only on the outer 
facades. The next two storeys are round a terrace or court- 
yard, in the middle of which rises a square tower of four storeys 
containing the family apartments, and crowned by the central 
dome rising perhaps 140 ft. from the terrace.^ 

The other palace is^even less known, as it belongs to the 
Bundelkhand state of t)rch& (Woodcut No. 361), but is of a 
much more varied outline than that at Datiyi, and with its 
domes and gateways makes up as picturesque a combination 
as can well be found anywhere. Built by the same Rija, it is 
too modern for much purity of detail, but that in a residence 
is less objectionable than it would be in a temple, or in an 
edifice devoted to any higher purpose. 

GwAliau. 

Perhaps the most historically interesting of these Central 
Indian palaces is that of GwSliar. The rock on which that 
fortress stands is of so peculiar a formation, and by nature 
so strong, that it must always have been occupied by the 
chiefs of the state in which it is situated. Its temples have 
already been described, but its older palaces have undergone 
the fate of all similar edifices ; it, however, possesses, or 
possessed, in that built by M&n Singh (a.d. 1486-1518), the 
most remarkable and interesting example of a HindO palace 
of an early age in India. The external dimensions of this 
palace are 300 ft. by 160 ft., and on the east side it is 100 
ft. high, having two underground storeys looking over the 
country. On all its faces the flat surface is relieved by tall towers 
of singularly pleasing design, crowned by cupolas that were 
covered with domes of gilt copper when BAbar- saw them in 

* Btf'Singh was employed by Jah&ngtr court. His tomb is at Crchd and is an 
in 1602 to wavlay and kill the famous enormous structure. 

Abud-Fazl, when returning to Akbar’s ^Rousselet, ‘L’lndedes Rajahs,’ p. 391. 



176 


CIVIL ARCHITECTURE. 


Book VI- 


1 527.^ His successor, Vikrama Sh&hi, added another palace, of 
even greater extent, to this one in 1518 and Jahftngtr and 
Sh&h Jah&n added palaces to these two, the whole making up 
a group of edifices unequalled for picturesqueness and interest 
by anything of their class that exists in Central India (Plate 
XXVIII.).® Among the apartments in the palace was one 
called the B^radari, supported on twelve columns, and 45 ft. 
square, with a stone roof, which was one of the most beautiful 
apartments of its class anywhere to be found. It was, besides, 
singularly interesting from the expedients to which the HindQ 
architect was forced to resort to imitate the vaults of the 
Moslims. They had not then learned to copy them, as they 
did at the end of that century, at Brind^ban and elsewhere, 
under the guidance of the tolerant Akbar. 

Of these buildings, which so excited the admiration of 
the Emperor B^bar, probably little now remains. The Moslims 
added to the palaces of the Hindus and spared the temples 
and the statues of the Jains ; we, have ruthlessly set to work to 
destroy whatever interferes with our convenience, and during 
the few years we occupied the fort, probably did more to 
disfigure its beauties, and obliterate its memories, than was 
caused by the Moslims during the centuries they possessed 
or occupied it. Better things were at one time hoped for, 
but the . fact seems to be that subordinates and contractors 
are allowed to do as they please, and if they can save them- 
selves trouble, there is nothing in India that can escape the 
effect of their unsympathising ignorance. 

Amber. 

The palace at Amber, the original capital of the Jay pur 
State, ranks next after that of Gwaliar as an architectural 


' Erskine’s ‘ Memoirs of Baber,’ p. 

384. 

^ Cunningham’s ‘Archaeological Re- 
ports,’ vol. ii. pp. 346 seqq,^ plates 87 
and 88. 

s We occupied the fort during the 
mutiny, and retained it long after. The 
first thing done was to occupy the 
B^radari as a mess-room ; to fit up 
fi^rtions of the palace for military occupa- 
tion ; then to build a range of barracks, 
and clear away a lot of antiquarian 
remains to make a parade ground. What 
all this means is only too easily under- 
stood. M. Rousselet — no unfriendly 
critic— observes ; — “ I-es Anglais sont 
tr^s-activement occupes a simplifier la 


besogne de Tarcheologue, et a faire 
disparattre ce pr6cieux document de 
I’histoire de I’lnde. D^ja toutes les con- 
structions k la gauche de la porte de 
Test sont livr^s k la pioche, et le 
meme sort est reserve au reste ” (‘ L’Inde 
des Rajahs,’ p. 362). And, again: 
“Mais, helas ! TOurwahai lui aussi a 
vecu. Quand j’y revins en d^cembre, 
1S67, les arbres ^taient coupes, les 
statues volaient en Eclats, sous les pics 
des travailleurs, et le ravin se remplissait 
des talus d’une nouvelle route construite 
par les Anglais: talus dans lesquels 
dorment les palais des Chand^las et des 
Tmiars. les idoles des Bouddhistes et des 
Jainas.’*— di, p. 366. 



Chap. V. 


AMBER. 


object among the R&jput palaces. It is, however, a century 
more modem, having been commenced by another Min Singh, 
who ascended the throne in 1592, and was completed by Jay- 
singh I, (1625-1666), who added the beautiful gateway which 
bears his name; Sawit Jaysingh 11 . removed the seat of govern- 
ment to Jaypur in 1728.^ In consequence of this more modem 
date it has not that stamp of Hindi originality that is so 
characteristic of the Gwiliar example, and throughout it bears 
a strong impress of that influence which Akbar’s mind and 
works stamped on everything that was done in I^ta during 
his reign. Its situation, too, is inferior to that of Gw&liar for 
architectural effect. Instead of standing on a lofty rocky 
pedestal, and its pinnacles being relieved boldly against the 
sky, the Amber palace is situated in a valley — picturesque, it 
is true, but where the masonry competes with the rocks in a 
manner which is certainly unfavourable to the effect of the 
building. Nothing, however, can be more picturesque than the 
way in which the palace grows, as it were, out of a rocky 
base, or reflects itself in the mirror of the lake at its base, and 
nothing can be happier than the mode in which the principal 
apartments are arranged, so as to afford views over the lake and 
into the country beyond. 

The details, too, of this palace are singularly good, and quite 
free from the feebleness that shortly afterwards characterised 
the style. In some respects, indeed, they contrast favourably 
with those of Akbar’s contemporary palace at Fathpur Stkrt. 
There the Moslim antipathy to images confined the fancy of the 
decorator to purely inanimate objects; here the laxer creed 
of the Hindds enabled him to indulge in elephant capitals 
and figure-sculpture of men and animals to any extent. The 
Hindds seem also to have indulged in colour and in mirrors to 
an extent that Akbar did not apparently feel himself justified 
in employing. The consequence is that the whole has a richer 
and more picturesque effect than its Muhamipadan rival, but 
the two together make up a curiously perfect illustration of 
the architecture of that day, as' seen from a Hindd, contrasted 
with that from a Muhammadan, point of view.* 

It was the same Mdn Singh who erected a ghdt and the 
Observatory at Benares which still bears his name,* and 

^ Hebw, by mktake, seems to have atat and Rajpatana,’ pfh 46f., and pt. 3% 
attribnted the work of Jaynngh I. to his * A century later, his descendant 
more Ulostiioas' desoendut Sawfit Jay- Saw&t Jaysingh set up several of the 
Mngh II, 1698-1743. instruments in it and built other ofaiervn- 

> Jaoquemont, 'voyage d«M I’lnde,’ tories at /•ypor, Ujljain, MathuiA and 
tome iiL w 37^, Heber’s 'Journal,’ voL DelhL— ' Indwn Antiquary,’ voL nav. 
u- PP> 3^; ‘Arriiitectnie, etc.,inGuj- (1906), p. 334, and refneneei. 



178 CIVIL ARCHITECTURE. Book VI. 


though not very architectural in its general appearance, has on 

the river-face a bal- 
conied window, which 
is a fair and pleasing 
specimen of the archi- 
tecture of his age 
( Woodcut No. 362). 
He also was the king 
who erected the temple 
at Brind8ban, which 
has been illustrated 
above (pp. 156, 157). 

dig. 

All the palaces 
above described are 
more or less irr^ular 
in their disposition, 
and are all situated 
on rocky and uneven 
ground. That at Dig, 
however, is on a per- 
fectly level plain, and 
laid out with a regu- 
larity that would satisfy 
the most fastidious 
Renaissance architect. 
It is wholly the work 
of Sdraj - Mall, the 
virtual founder of the 
Bharatpur dynasty, 
who commenced it, ap- 
parently in 1725, and 
left it as we now see it, 
when he was slain in 
(From a battle with Najaf Kh&n 
in Dec. 1763. It wants, 
it is true, the massive 
character of the fortified palaces of other R8jput states, but 
for grandeur of conception and beauty of detail it surpasses 
them all. 



Balcony' at the Observatory, Benares. 
Drawing by the late James Prinsep. ) 


The whole palace was to have consisted of a rectangular 
enclosure twice the length of its breadth, surrounded with 
buildings, with a garden in the centre, divided into two parts by 
a broad terrace, intended to carry the central pavilion. Only 
one of these rectangles has been completed, measuring about 



Chap. V. 


DIG. 


*79 


700 ft square,^ crossed in the centre by ranges of the most 
beautiful fountains and parterres, laid out in the formal style 
of the East, and interspersed with architectural ornaments of 
the most elaborate finish. 

The pavilion on the north side contains the great audience- 
hall, 76 ft 8 in. by 54 ft 7 in., divided in the centre by a noble 
range of arcades, ^hind which are the 
principal dwelling apartments, two, and 
in some parts three, storeys in height 
Opposite ^is is a pavilion occupied princi- 
pally by fountains. On one side stands 
a marble hall, attached to an older palace 
facing the principal pavilion, which was 
meant to occupy the centre of the garden. 

As will be seen by the plan (Woodcut 
No. 363), it is a parallelogram of 152 ft. 
by 87 ft, each end occupied by a small, 
but very elegant range of apartments, in ^3- Hall at Dig. 
two storeys ; the central hall (108 ft. by 
87 ft) is supported on four rows of columns, 
and open at both sides; at each end is a marble reservoir 
for fountains, and a similar one exists externally on each 
side. The whole is roofed with stone, except the central part, 
which, after being contracted by a Iwld cove, i.s roofed with 
a flat ceiling of timber exquisitely carved. This wooden 
ceiling seems to have been considered a defect, nothing but 
stone being used in any other part of the palace. The archi- 
tect, therefore, attempted to roof the corresponding pavilion 
of the unfinished court with slabs of stone 34 ft. in length, 
and 18 ' in. square. Some of these still exist in their places 
but their weight was too great for the arcades, which are only 
18 in. thick, and not of solid stone, but of two facings 4 or 
5 in. thick, and the intermediate spaces filled in with rubble. 
Besides this, though the form of the arch is literally copied 
from the Muhammadan style, neither here, nor elsewhere 
throughout the palace, is there a single true arch, the open- 
ings being virtually covered by two brackets meeting in the 
centre. 

The general appearance of the arcades of these buildings 
may be gathered from the annexed view (Woodcut No.- 364), 
and may be characterised as more elegant than rich. The 
glory of Dig, however, consists in the cornices, which are 
generally double, a peculiarity not seen elsewhere, and which 

‘ A plan of it is given in Lieut. Cole’s ‘ Report on the Buildings near Agra,’ 
(pp. 41-58 and eight plates), correct as far as it goes, but not complete. 




i8o 


CIVIL ARCHITECTURE. 


Book VI. 


for extent of shadow and richness of detail surpass any similar 
ornaments in India, either in ancient or modem buildings. 
The lower cornice is the usual sloping entablature, almost 
universal in such buildings. This was adopted apparently 



364. View from the Central Pavilion in the Palace at Dig. (From a Photograph.) 


because it took the slope of the curtains, which almost invari- 
ably hang beneath its projecting shade, and which, when 
drawn out, seem almost a continuation of it. The upper 
cornice, which was horizontal, is peculiar to Dig, and seems 
design^ to furnish an extension of the flat roof which in 
Eastern palaces is usually considered the best apartment of 
the house ; but whether designed for this or any other pur- 
pose, it adds singularly to the richness of the effect, and by 
the double shadow affords a relief and character seldom ex- 
ceeded even in the East 

Generally speaking, the bracket arcade of Dig are neither 
so rich nor so appropriate as the bold bracket capiteUs of the 
older styles. That the bracket is almost exclusively an or^final 
Indian form of capital can, I think, scarcely be doutked ; but 
the system was carried much further by the Mughals, especially 
daring the rdgn of Akbar, than it had ever been carried by its 




Chap. V. GHATS OR LANDING-PLACES. i8i 

original inventors, at least in the North. The Hindis, on 
receiving it back, luxuriated in its picturesque richness to an 
extent that astonishes every beholder; and half the effect of 
most of the modem buildings of India is owing to the bold pro- 
jecting balconies and fanciful kiosks that diversify the otherwise 
plain walls. 

The greatest defect of the palace is that the style, when it 
was erected, was losing its true form of lithic propriety. The 
form of its pillars and their ornaments are better suited for 
wood or metal than for stone architecture; and though the 
style of the Mughals, in the last days of their dynasty, was 
tending in that direction, it never threw off the solidity and 
constructive propriety to such an extent as is done in these 
modern palaces of the Hindfls. It is not at Dig carried so far 
as to be offensive, but it is on the verge of good taste, and in 
some more modern buildings assumes forms more suited for 
upholstery than for stone architecture. 

Since the time when Sdraj-Mall completed this fairy creation, 
the tendency, not only with the Rajput princes, but the 
sovereigns of such states as Oudh, and even as Delhi, has been 
to copy the bastard style of Italian architecture we introduced 
into India. It was natural, perhaps, that they should admire 
the arts of a race who had shown themselves in war and policy 
superior to themselves; but it was fatal to their arts, and 
whether a revival is now possible remains to be seen. 

GhAts or Landing-places. 

Another object of architectural magnificence peculiar to 
northern Hindustan, is the construction of iheghdts that every- 
where line the river-banks in most of the great cities, more 
especially those which are situated on the Ganges. Benares 
possesses perhaps the greatest number of edifices of this class ; 
but from Calcutta to Hardwflr no city is without some speci- 
mens of this species of architectural display. The Ghusli 
Gh&t at Benares (Woodcut No. 365), though one of the most 
modern, may be taken as a fair specimen of the class, although 
many are richer and much more elaborately adorned. Their 
object being to afford easy access to bathers, the flight of steps 
in front is in reality the ghdt, and the main object of the erection. 
These are generally broken, as in this instance, by small pro- 
jections, often crowned by kiosks, which take off the monotony 
inherent in long lines of narrow steps. The flight of stairs 
is always backed by a building, which in most instances is 
merely an object of ardiitectural display without any particular 
destination, except to afford shelter from the rays of the sun 
to such of the idle as choose to avail themselves of it. When 



i8a CIVIL ARCHITECTURE. Book VI. 

the bank is high, the lower part of these buildings is solid, 
and when, as in this instance, it is nearly plain, it affords a 



noble basement to an ornamental upper storey, with which 
they are generally adorned, or to the temple which frequently 
crowns them. 

Though the Ganges is, par excellences the river of gh&ts, 
one of the most beautiful in India is that erected by Ahalyi 
Bftt (Khdnde Rio Holkar’s widow) at Maherwar, on the Narbadi ; 
and Ujjain and other ancient cities almost rival Benares in this 
respect. Indeed, there is scarcely a tank or stream in all India 
that is without its flight of steps, and it is seldom indeed that 
these are left without some adornment or an attempt at archi- 
tectural display, water being always grateful in so hot a 
climate, and an especially favourite resort with a people so 
fond of washing and so cleanly in their habits as the HindOs. 
Of such there are abundant examples, such as the Kunda or 
pond before the Sflrya temple at Modherft, the tanks at Vtram- 
gflm, Kflpadvanj, and almost everywhere. 



Chap. V. 


RESERVOIRS— DAMS. 


183 


Reservoirs. 

The same fondness for water has given rise to another 
species of architectural display peculiar to India, in the great 
reservoirs or baolts^ which are found wherever the wells are 
deep and water far from . the surface. In design they are 
exactly the reverse of the gh&ts, since the steps are wholly 
below the ground, and descend to the water sometimes even 
at a depth of 80 ft. or 100 ft. Externally they make no 
display, the only objects usually seen above ground being 
two pavilions to mark the entrance, between which a bold 
flight of steps, from 20 ft. to 40 ft. in width, leads down to 
the water. Facing the entrance is a great screen, rising 
perpendicularly from the water to the surface of the ground, 
and dividing the stairs from a circular shaft or well, up which 
the water is drawn by pulleys for agriculture, and for those 
who prefer that mode of ‘obtaining it instead of descending 
the steps. The walls between which the steps descend are 
ornamented by niches, and covered with galleries leading to 
the great screen. Where the depth is great, there is often 
one or more screens across the stairs .dividing the way down. 

To persons not familiar with the East such an architectural, 
object as a baolt may seem a strange perversion of ingenuity, 
but the grateful coolness of all subterranean apartments, 
especially when accompanied by water, and the quiet shade of 
these recesses, fully compensate, in the eyes of the Hindfi, for 
the more attractive magnificence of the gh&ts. Consequently, 
the descending flights of which we are now speaking, have 
often been made more elaborate and expensive pieces of 
architecture than any of the buildings above ground found in 
their vicinity.^ 

Dams. 

In the same manner the b&nds or dams of the artificial 
lakes, or great tanks, which are so necessary for irrigation, 
are often made works of great architectural magnificence, first 
by covering them with flights of steps, like those of the ghftts, 
and then erecting temples or pavilions, and kiosks, interspersed 
with fountains and statues in breaks between these nights. 
Where all these are of marble, as is sometimes the case in 
Rajputana, the whole make up as perfect a piece of archi- 
tectural combination as any the Hindils can boast of. 

One of the most beautiful of these is that erected at 
R&janagar near K&nkroli, by Rftnd Rftjasingh, who ascended the 

‘ For examples of these baolls or w£vs plates 2, 3, 6, 13-16, 22 and 23 ; vol. 
see ‘Archeological Survey of Western ix. pp. 37-38, loi, 112-113, and plates 3, 
India,’ vol. viii. pp. 1-6, and 10-14, with 13, fo, and 104, 107. 



184 


CIVIL ARCHITECTURE. 


Book VI. 


throne of Udaypur in 1653, to form the lake of R8jasamudra 
(Woodcut No. 366), which is the second most extensive in his 
dominions. It was undertaken, too, as a relief work during 
the great famine of 1661. This band is about loyo feet in 



366. Band of Lake RAjasamudra. (From a Sketch by the Author.) 


length, and wholly covered with white marble steps ; and with 
its beautiful kiosks projecting into the water, and the old 
palaces which crown the hill at one end, it makes up a fairy 
scene of architectural beauty, with its w'aters and its woods, 
which is hardly surpassed by any in the East.* 

It would be tedious, however, to enumerate, without 
illustrating them, which the limits of this work will not permit, 
all the modes of architectural magnificence of the Hindfis. 
Like all people untrammelled by rules derived from incongruous 
objects, and gifted with a feeling for the beautiful, they adorn 
whatewr they require, and convert every object, however 
utilitarian in its purposes, into an object of beauty. They long 
ago found out that it is not temples and palaces alone that 
are capable of such display, but that everything which man 

* * Architecture and Scenery in Gujarat of an upper flight of steps, are four 
and Rajputanu,’ pp. 25, 26 and photo- Ktrtti-stambhas, of no great size, but 
graph 13* Though not shown in the adding to the pleasing character of the 
woodcut, but standing back at the head structure. 




Crap. V. 


DAMS. 


iSs 

makes may become beautiful, provided the hand of taste be 
guided by sound judgment, and that the architect never forgets 
what the object is, and never conceals the constructive 
exigencies of the building itself.* It is simply this inherent 
taste and love of beauty, which the Hindds seem always to 
have possessed, directed by unaffected honesty of purpose, 
which enables them to erect, even at the present day, buildings 
that will bear comparison with the best of those erected in 
Europe during the Middle Ages. It must be confessed that 
it would require far more comprehensive illustration than the 
preceding slight sketch of so extensive a subject can pretend 
to be, to make this apparent to others. But no one who has 
personally visited the objects of interest with which India 
abounds can fail to be struck with the extraordinary elegance 
of detail and propriety of design which pervades all the 
architectural achievements of the Hindfls ; and this not only 
in buildings erected in former days, but in* those now in course 
of construction in those parts of the country to which the bad 
taste of their European rulers has not yet penetrated. 

^ Even sluices were made artistic, as at Ahmadib^d and elsewhere. — 
' Archaeological Survey of Western India,’ vol. 'vii. pp. 50*53, and plates 63 and 65. 



BOOK VII. 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. 


CHAPTER I. 

INTRODUCTORY. 

From a very early period in the world’s histoiy a great group 
of civilised nations existed in Western Asia between the 
Mediterranean and the Indus. They lived apart, having few 
relations with their neighbours, except of war and hatred, and 
served rather to separate than to bring together the Indian 
and Europl^n communities which flourished beyond them 
on either jfiand. 

Alexander’s p^eat raid was the first attempt to break through 
this barrier, and to join the East and West by commercial or 
social interchanges. The steady organisation of the Roman 
empire succeeded in consolidating what that brilliant conqueror 
had sketched out. During the permanence of her supremacy 
the space intervening between India and Europe Wcis bridged 
over by the order she maintained among the various communities 
established in Western Asia, and there seemed no re2ison 
why the intercourse so established should be interrupted. 
Unsuspected, however, by the Roman world, two nomad 
nation^, uninfluenced by its civilisation, hung on either flank 
of this great line of communication, ready to avail themselves 
of any moment of weakness that might occur. 

The Arabs, as the most impetuous, and nearest the centre, 
were the first to break their bounds ; and in the course of the 
yth century Syria, Persia, Egypt, and the north of Africa became 
theirs. Spain was conquered, and India nearly shared the 
same fate. Under Mu’&wiah, the first Khaltfah of the 
Umayyades, attempts were made to cross the Indus by the 
southern route — that which the Skythians had successfully 
followed a short time before. Both these attempts failed, but 
under Walid, Muhammad ibn Q&sim, A.H. 93 (a.d. 712), they did 



Chap. I. INTRODUCTORY. 187 

eflfTCt a settlement in Sindh. It proved a barren conquest, how- 
ever ; for though a Muhammadan dynasty was estaUished there, 
it soon became independent of the Khalifat, and eventually 
died out. 

The ' supremacy of the Khalifat was as brief as it was 
brilliant. Its hour of greatest glory was about the year A.D. 
806, in the reign of H&rOn aZ-Rashld. From that time decay 
set in ; and after two centuries more the effeminacy and 
corruption inherent in Eastern dynasties had so far progressed 
as to encourage the Northern hordes to move. 

During the course of the nth century the Tartar hordes, 
who were hitherto only known as shepherds pasturing their 
herds on the steppes of Central Asia, made their appearance 
south of the Faropamisan range as conquerors; and for six 
centuries their progress was steadily onwards, till, in the year 
A.D. 1683, we find the Turks encamped under the walls of 
Vienna, and the Mughal Aurangztb lord paramount of the 
whole of India Proper, while Egypt and all the intervening 
countries owned the rule of sovereigns of Turanian race. 

The architecture of the nations under the Arab Khalifat has 
been elsewhere described, and is of very minor importance.^ 
The ruling people were of Semitic race, and had no great taste 
for architectural magnificence ; and unless where they happened 
to govern a people of another stock, they have left few traces 
of their art. 

With the Northern hordes the case was widely different; 
they were of Turanian blood, more or less pure, and wherever 
they went their mosques, and especially their tombs, remain 
to mark their presence, and to convey an idea of their splendour. 
In order to understand what follows, it is necessary to bear in 
mind that the Semitic conquest, from Mecca as a centre, 
extended from the mouths of the Guadalquivir to those of 
the Indus, and left but little worthy of remark in architecture. 
The Turanian conquest, from Bukhiri and Balkh as centres, 
extended from Constantinople to Katak, and covered the whole 
intervening space with monuments of every class. Those 
of the west and centre have been described in speaking of 
Turkey and Persia;* the Eastern branch remains to be dis- 
cussed, and its monuments are those of which this work 
purports to. be a description. 

The Saracenic architects showed in India the saflse pliancy 
in adopting the styles of the various people among wlHMb th^r 


» 

tectum disi 


showed little tiste for tidii- 

displav till she foUuader theiwaj 

of the Mumldk Sultips, A.D. I3S0» aiia 
Sfuicenic uchiteQliab iii Fttiii pned- 


odl^L m MJiiqides, 

* oT Aiiittnt and Medieval 

iUcUteetliie/ pA ed. td. ii. pp. ssdffg. 



iSS INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 

had settled which characterised their practice in the countries 
just mentioned. It thus happens that in India we have at 
least twelve or fifteen different styles of Muhammadan archi- 
tecture: and if an attempt were made to exhaust all the 
examples, it would be found necessary to enumerate even 
a greater number. Meanwhile, however, the following thirteen 
divisions will probably be found sufficient for present purposes: — 

1. The first of these is that of Gkaznt, which, though not, 
strictly speaking, in India, had without doubt the most 
important influence on the Indian styles, and formed in fact 
the stepping-stone by means of which the architecture of the 
West was introduced into India, and it long remained the 
connecting link between the styles of the Eastern and those 
of the Western world. It would consequently be of the 
greatest importance in enabling us to understand the early 
examples of the style in India Proper, if we could describe 
this one with anything like precision, but for that we must 
wait till some qualified person visits the province. 

2. Next to this comes the Patkdn style of northern India 
(A.D. 1193-1554), spreading over the whole of Upper India, 
and lasting for about three centuries and a half. After the 
death, however, of ’Al&u-d-DIn Muhammad Sh&h I. (a.D. 1316) 
the central ' power was at times so weak, that the recently 
conquered outlying provinces were frequently enabled to 
render themselves independent, and| when this was the case, 
exhibited their individuality everywhere, by inventing a style 
of architecture expressive of their local peculiarities. 

3. One of the first to exhibit this tendency was the brilliant 
but short-lived Sbarql dynasty of Jaunpur (A.D. 1394-1476). 
Though existing for less than a century, they adorned their 
capitu and other cities with a series of mosques and other 
buildings which are hardly surpassed by those of any city 
and district in India for magnificence, and by none for a 
well-marked individuality of treatment. 

4. The style adopted by the kings of Gujardt during their 
period bf independence (A.D. 1396-1572) was richer and more 
varied than jthat of Jaunpur, though hardly so original or 
marked by such individuality. They borrowed too much, 
physically as well as intellectually, from the architecture of 
the Hindfis and Jains, among whom they were located, to be 
entirely independent ; but the richness of their style is in pro- 
portion to the HindO details they inbroduc^. 

5. Mdlwd became Independent in A.D. 1401, and between 
that date and A.D. 1569, when they were abrarbed in the 
Mughal empire, her kings adorned their capital at Mandfl 
with palaces and mosques of great magnificence, but more 



INTRODUCTORY. 


Chap. I. 


189 


similar to the parent style at Delhi than the two last-named 
styles, and wanting, consequently, in local individuality. 

& Bengal was early erected into a separate kingdom — ^in 
A.D. 1203 — more or less independent of the central power; 
and during its continuance — ^till A.D. 1573 — ^the capitals, Gaur 
and Md^, were adorned with many splendid edifices. 
Generally these were in brick, and are now so overgrown by 
jungle as to be either ruined or nearly invisible. They are 
singularly picturesque, however, and display all the features 
of a strongly-marked individuality of style. 

These six divisions are probably sufficient to characterise 
the Muhammadan styles north of the Narbadd. To the south 
of that river there are three well-marked styles. 

7. First that of the Bahtnani dynasty. First at Kulbarga, 
A.D. 1347, and afterwards at Bldar, A.D. 1426, they adorned 
their capitals with edifices of great magnificence and well- 
marked individuality, before they were absorbed, in A.D. 1525, 
in the great Mughal empire. 

8. Next to these was the still more celebrated ’Adil Sh8ht 
dynasty of Bijdpdr (a.d. 1490-1660). Their style differed 
most essentially from all those above enumerated, and was 
marked by a grandeur of conception and boldness in construc- 
tion unequalled by any edifices erected in India 

9. The third southern style is that of the Qutb Sh&ht 
dynasty of Golkonda, A.D. 1512-1672. Their tombs are 
splendid, and form one of the most striking groups in India, 
but show evident signs of a decadence that was too surely 
invading art at the age when they were erected. 

10. One by one all these brilliant individualities were 
absorbed in the great Mughal empire, founded by Bibar, A.D. 
1526, and which, though practically perishing on the death 
of Aurangztb, A.D. 1707, may be considered as existing till 
the middle of the i8th century, A.D. 1750. It is to this 
dynasty that Agra, Delhi, and most of the towns in northern 
India owe their most splendid- edifices. 

11. Before leaving this branch of the subject it mty 1 m 
expedient to enumerate the style of Moslim art existing in 
Sindh. Practically, it is Persian both in its 'form and the style 
of decoration, and mpst have existed in this province from 
a very ancient time. All the examples known of it, however, 
are comparatively modern, and bring us back, curiously enough, 
to the neighbourhood of Ghazni, from which we started in 
our enumeration. 

12. Leaving these, which may be called the ^e styles of 
Muhammadan architecture, we have two which may be 
designated as the bastard styles. The first of these is that of 



INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. BookVH. 


tpo 

Oudk (A.D. 1756-1847). In its capital there are ranges of 
building equal in extent and richness to those of any of the 
capitals above enumerated ; but degraded in taste to an extent 
it is hardly possible to credit in a people who so shortly before 
had shown themselves capable of such noble aspirations. 

13. The style adopted by the short-lived dynasty of Mysore 
(A.D. 1760-179^), being further removed from the influences of 
European vulgarity, is not so d^raded as that of Lucknow, 
but is poor and inartistic when compared with earlier styles. 

In an exhaustive treatise on the subject, the styles of 
Ahmadnagar and Aurangibfld, A.D. 1490-1707, ought, perhaps, 
to be enumerated, and some minor styles elsewhere. These 
have not, however, sufficient individuality to deserve being 
regarded as separate styles, and the amount of illustration 
that can be introduced into a work like the present is not 
sufficient to render the differences sensible to those who are 
not personally acquainted with the examples. 

Even as it is, it would require a much more extensive series 
of illustrations than that here given to make even their most 
marked merits or peculiarities evident to those who have no 
other means than what such a work as this affords of forming 
an opinion regarding them. Each of these thirteen styles 
deserves a monograph ; but, except for BijSpQr,^ Ahmad&b&d,^ 
Jaunpur,’ and Fathpur SikrV nothing of the sort has yet been 
attempted, and even the works in which this has been attempted 
hardly quite exhaust the materials for these cities available for 
the purpose. Let us hope that the deficiencies will be supplied, 
and the others undertaken before it is too late, for the buildings 
are fast perishing from the ravages of time and climate and 
the still more destructive exigencies and ill-advised interferences 
of the governing power in India. 

* 'Ardiitecture of Beejapore. Photo- ’'The Sharat .Architecture of Jaun- 
gratdied from Drawi^ by Capt. Hart pur, etc., with Drawings, etc., by 
and A. Gumming, CE., and on the spot Ed. W. Smith, edited by J. Burgess 
by Col. Biggs and Major Loch, with text (1889). 

by Ool. Meadows Taylor and J. Fergus- ’ The splendidly illustrated work on 
son.’ Folio, Murray, 1866. the * Moghul Architecture of Fathpur 

’ ' Architecture of Ahmedaixul. 120 Sikrt,* by the late Edmund W. Smith, 
Photomphs by Col. Biggs, with Text by in four quarto volumes with 402 excellent 
Sir T.C. Hope, I.C.S. and Jas. Fergus- plates (1894-1898^ mutt not be over- 
son.’ Small folio, Murray, 1866 ; The looked. It treats exhaustively of the 
Muhammadan Architecture of Ahmad- architecture of that one place; and his 
ftb&d and Gujarit generally will be found ' Moghul Colour Decoration of Agra ’ 
described in detail in volumes vi. to ix. (1901) supplies tome important ar^i- 
of the ‘ Archaeological Survey of Western tecturul drawings. 

India’ (1896-1905.) 



CHAPTER II. 


ghazn!. 

CONTENTS. 

Tomb of Mahmud — Gates of Somn&th — Minirs on the Plain 


CHRONOLOGY. 

Sabuktigtn, founder . . A.D. 975 ’Abdu-A Rashid . . . . A.D. 1048 


Mahmdd 997 Ibr&htm 1059 

Mas'Cid 1031 Shih&bu-d-Din (Ghhri dynasty) 1203 


Towards the latter part of the 9th century the power of the 
Khaltfs of Baghd&d was sinking into that state of rapid decline 
which is the fate of all Eastern dynasties. During the reign 
of A 1 Mo’tamid, A.D. 870-891, Egypt became independent, and 
the northern province of BukhSrft threw off the yoke under 
the governor appointed by the Khaltfah Nasr Ahmad, a 
grandson of S&min, a Tartar chief, who declared and main- 
tained his independence, and so formed the Sftm&nt dynasty. 
After the dynasty had existed about a century, Sabuktigtn, . 
a Turkish slave belonging to a general of one of the last of the 
Samanian kings, rendered himself also independent of his 
master, and established himself in Ghazni, of which he was 
governor, founding the well-known dynasty of Ghaznavides. 
His son and successor, MahmOd, A.D. 997-1030, is one of the 
best-known kings in Indian History owing to his brilliant 
campaigns in India, and more especially that in which he 
destroyed the celebrated temple of Somn&th. 

On his return from an earlier campaign, in which he had 
sacked the town of Mathurfi, we learn from Ferishta that the 
king ordered a magnificent mosque to be built of marble and 
granite, afterwards known by the name of the Celestial Bride. 
Near it he founded a university. When the nobility of Ghazni 
perceived the taste of their king in architecture, they also 
endeavoured to vie with (»ie another in the magnificence of 
their palaces, as well as in the public buildings which were 



199 INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 

raised for the embellishment of the city. “ Thus,” continues 
the historian, '* the capital was in a short time ornamented 



367. MinAr at Ghaznt. (From a Drawing by G. T. Vigne, Esq. ) 

with mosques, porches, foqntains, aqueducts, reservoirs, and 
cisterns, beyond any city in the East” ^ 

The plain of GluunI still shows the remains of this 
splendour ; and, in the dearth of information regjarding Persian 
art of that age, an account of it would be one of the most 

* Brigg’s tianslatioa of ‘ Feruhta,’ wA. L p. 61 . 


Chak II. 


GHAZNI 


*93 


interesting and Valuable pieces o£ information we could receive. 
These ruins, however, have not been as yet either examined 
or described;* and even the tomb of the Great Mahmfid is 
unknown to us except by name,* notmthstanding the' celebrity 
it acquired from the removal of its gates to India at the 
termination of our disastrous campaigns in that country. 

The gates are of Deodar pine,* and the dured ornaments on 
them are so similar to those found at Cairo, on the mosque of 



368. Ornaments from the Tomb of Mahmiid at GhaxnK 

Ibn Tulun and other buildings of that age, as not only to 
prove that they are of the same date, but also to show how 
similar were the modes of decoration at these two extremities 
of the Moslim empire at the time of their execution. 

At the same time there is nothing in their style of orna- 
mentation that at ail resembles anything found in any Hindil 
temple, either of their age or at any other time. There is, in 
fact, no reason for doubting that these gates were made for 


* It is very mnch to be regretted 'that 
not a single officer accompanied our 
armies, when they passed and repassed 
through Ghasnt, able or willii^ to appre- 
ciate the interest of these ruins ; and it 
is to be hoped, if an opportunity should 
again occur, that their importance to the 
wtory of art in the East will not be 
overlooked. 

‘The sketch of the tomb published 
by Mr. Vigne in his ' Travels in Afghan- 
istan,’ gives too confined a portion of it 


to enable us to judge either of its fuim 
or detail. The gate in front is probably 
modem, and the foiled arches in the 
background appear to be the - only parts 
that Mong to the iith century. 

‘ The tradition that these gates were 
of sandal-wood, and brought from Som- 
n&th, is entirely disproved by the fact of 
their being of the local pine-wood, as 
well as by the style of decoration, which 
has no resemblance to Hindi! work. 


*94 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


the place where they were found.* If any other parts of the 
tomb are ornamented in the same style, it would be of great 
interest to have them drawn. It probably is, however, from 
the Jftmi’ Masjid that we shall obtain the best picture of the 
arts of that day, when any one will take the trouble of 
examining it. 

Two minirs still adorn the plain outside the city, and form, 
if not the most striking, at least the most prominent of the 
ruins of that city. Neither of them was ever attached to a 
mosque ; they are, indeed, pillars of victory, or Jaya Stambkas, 
like those at Chitor and elsewhere in India, and are such as 
we might expect to find in a country so long Buddhist. One 
of them was erected by Mahmfid himself ; the other was built, 
or at least finished, by Mas'dd, one of his immediate successors.* 

The lower part of these towers is of a star-like form — 
the plan being apparently formed by placing two squares 
di^onally the one over the other. The upper part, rising 
to the height of about 140 ft from the ground, is circular; 
both are of brickwork, covered with ornaments of terra-cotta 
of extreme elaboration and beauty, and retaining their sharp- 
ness to the present day. 

Several other minirs of the same class are found further 
west, even- as far as the roots of the Caucasus,* which, like 
these, were pillars of victory, erected by the conquerors on 
their battle-fields. None of them have the same architectural 
merit as those of Ghazni, at least in their present state, though 
it may be that their ornaments, having been in stucco or some 
perishable material, have disappeared, leaving us now only the 
skeleton of what they were. 

The weakness of Mahmud’s successors left the Indians in 
repose for more than a century and a half ; and, like all 
- Eastern dynasties, the Ghaznavides were gradually sinking to 
inevitable decay, when their fall was precipitat«l by the crimes 
of one of them, which were fearfully avenged by the destruction 
of their empire and capital by ’Alau-d-Dtn Hasan, and their race 
was at length superseded by that of the Ghuri, in the person of 
Shih&bu-d-Dtn Muhammad ibn S&m, in the year 1186. 

Though centuries of misrule have weighed on this country 
since the time of the Ghaznavides, it is scarcely probable that 
all traces of their magnificence have passed away ; but till their 


‘ An excellent representation of these 
gates will be found in the second edition 
of * Marco Polo’s Travels/ by Col. Vule. 
vol. ii. p. 390. 

^ See translation of the inscription on 


these minars, * journal of the Asiatic 
Society of Bengal/ vol. xii. (1843), pp. 
77. 78. 

* Two are represented by Dubois de 
Montpcreux, ‘ Voyage antour du Oiucase/ 



Chap. II. 


GHAZNI. 


*95 


cities are examined and photographed some one competent 
to discriminate between what is good or bad, or bid or new, 
we must be content merely to indicate the position of the 
style, leaving this chapter to be written when the requisite 
information shall have been obtained. In the meanwhile it is 
satisfactory to know that between Herat and the Indus there 
do exist a sufficient number of monuments to enable us to 
connect the styles of the West with those in the East. They 
have been casually described by travellers, but not in such a 
manner as to render them available for our purposes ; and in 
the unsettled state of the country it may some time yet 
before their elucidation can be accomplished. 



CHAPTER III. 
pathAn style. 

CONTENTS. 

Mosque at Old Delhi — Qutb Min^r — Tomb of *Al&u-d-D!n — Pathin 
Tombs — Ornamentation of Pathdn Tombs. 


CHRONOLOGY. 


ShihAbu-d-Dln Ghdri 
Qntbii-d’Dtn ibak 
Shaaisu-d-Dtn Altamsh . 


A.D. 


*Aliii-d-Dtn Khalji 
Nitirn-d-Dln Khusril, last of 
the Khaljis ' . 


1193 

1206 

1210 

1296 

1320 


Tu^hlaq Shih I. . . 1321 

Khizr IChin, under Ttmurlang A.D. 1414 
Bahlol Lodt .... 1451 

Sher Sh&h . . . . ' 1540 

Sikandar Shih Sur, defeated by 
Akbar .... 1555 


With all the vigour of a new race, the Ghl^rians set about the 
conquest of India. After sustaining a defeat in the year 1 191, 
Shih&bu-d-D!n again entered India in A.D. 1192, when he 
attacked and defeated Prithvtr&ja of Ajmtr. This success 
was followed by the conquest of Kanauj in A.D. 1193; and 
after the fall of these two, the capitals of the. greatest empires 
in the north of India may be said to have been Conquered 
before his assassination, which happened in A.D. 1206. 

At his death his great empire fell to pieces, and India fell 
to the share of Qutbu-d-D!n Ibak. This prince was originally 
a Turkish slave, who afterwards became one of Shih&bu-d- Din’s 
generals, and contributed greatly by his talents and military 
skill to the success of his master who had left him as his 
deputy in India in 1192. He and his successor, Altamsh, 
continued nobly the work so successfully begun, and before 
the death of the latter, in A.D. 1235, the empire of northern 
India had permanently passed from the hands of the Hindljs 
to those of their Muhammadan conquerors. 

For a century and a half after the conquest the empire con- 
tinued a united whole, under Turkish, or, as they are usually 
called, Path&n dynasties. These monarchs exhibited a con- 
tinued vigour and enei^ very unusual in the East, and not 



CHAii;in. PATHAN STYLE *97 

only sustained and consolidated, but increased by successive 
conquests from the natives, that newly-acquired acMsSion to 
the dominions of the faithful, and during that time Delhi 
continued practically the capital of this great empire. In the 
'atter half, however, of the 14th century, symptoms of dis- 
integration manifested themselves. One after another the 
governors of distant provinces reared the standard of revolt, 
and successfully established independent kingdoms, rivalling the 
parent state in power and in the splendour of their capitals. 
Still Delhi remained the nominal head at least of this confedera- 
tion of states — if it may be so called — ^till the time when Bibar 
(A.D. 1526), the sixth in descent from Ttmirlang, invaded 
Hindustan. He put an end to the Pathin sway, after it had 
lasted for three centuries and a half, and finally succeeded in 
establishing the celebrated dynasty of the Mughals, which 
during six successive reigns, extending over the extraordinary 
period of nearly two centuries (a.d. 1526-1707), reconsolidat^ 
the Muslim empire into one great whole, which reached a degree 
of splendour and of power almost unknown in the East 

Nothing could be more brilliant, and at the same time more 
characteristic, than the commencement of the architectural 
career of these Path&ns in India. So soon as th^ felt them- 
selves at all sure of their conquests, they set'-to_work to erect 
two great mosques in their two principal capitals of Ajmtr 
and Delhi, of such magnificence as should redound^ to the glory 
of their religion, and mark their triumph over the idolaters. A 
nation of soldiers equipped for conquest, and that only, th^ had 
of course brought with them neither artists nor architects, but, 
like other nations of Turanian origin, they had strong archi- 
tectural instincts, and having a style of their own, they could 
hardly go wrong in any architectural project they^ might 
attempt. At the same time, they found amcmg their new 
subjects an infinite number of artists quite capable of carry- 
ing out any design that might be propounded to them.- 
In the first place, they found in the colonnaded courts of the 
Jaina temples nearly all that was wanted for a ready-made 
mosque. All that was required was the removal of the temple 
in its centre, and the erection of a new wall on the west^ «de, 
adorned with niches — mihrdbs — to point out to the faithful 
the direction in which Mecca lay, towards which th^ 
commanded in the Qor&n to turn when they prayed. It » 
certain, however, that in India they never were content with 
this only. In the two instances at least to which we are now 
referring, they determined in addition to erect a scimn of 
arches in front of the Jaina pillars, and to adorn it with all 
the richness and elaboration of carving which their Indian 



198 INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 

subjects were capable of executing. Nothing could be more 
successful than the results. There is a largeness and grandeur 
about the plain simple outline of the Muhammadan arches 
whidi quite overshadows the smaller parts of the Hindu fanes, 
and at the same time the ornamentation, though applied to a 
greater extent than in any other known examples, is kept so 
flat as never to interfere with or break the simple outlines of 
the architectural construction. There may be other examples 
of surface-decoration as elaborate as this, but hardly anywhere 
on such a scale. Some parts of the interior of Sta. Sophia at 
Constantinople axe as beautiful,^ but they are only a few square 
yards. The palace at Mashita, if completed, might have rivalled 
it, but it is a fragment ; * and there may be — certainly were — 
examples in Persia between the times of Khosroes and Hftrun 
a/-Rashtd, which may have equalled these, but they have 
perished, or at least are not known to us now ; and even if 
they ever existed, must have been unlike these mosques. In 
them we find a curious exemplification of some of the best 
qualities of the art, as exhibited previously by the Hindus, 
and practised afterwards by their conquerors. 


Delhi. 

Of the two mosques at Old Delhi and at Ajmir, the first 
named is the earlier, having been begun some seven or eight 
years before the other, and is also very much the larger.* It is, 
besides, associated with the Qutb Minftr, and some of the most 
beautiful tombs of the age, which altogether make up a group 
with which nothing at Ajmir can compare. The situation, 
too, of the Delhi ruins is singularly beautiful, for they stand on 
the gentle slope of a hill, overlooking a plain that had once 
apparently been a lake, but which afterwards became the site of 
three successive capitals of the East. In front are the ruins of 
Tughlaq&b^d, the gigantic fort of an old Path&n chief; and 
further north the plain is still covered with the ruins of 
Flroz8b4d and Indrapat, the capitals of the later Pathans 
and earlier Mughals. Beyond that, at the distance of about 

^ * History of Ancient and Medieval Aliamsh, wl'.o was the real builder of 
Architecture/ voL i« pp« 440 e/ seqq, both, the screen of arches at Delhi had 

^ Ibid. vol. i. pp 401 et seqq, been extended to 380 ft. as compared 

’ Gen. Cunningham's * Archaeological with the 200 ft. at Ajmtr, and the court- 
Reports/ vol. ii. u. 260. But though yards of the two mosques are nearly in 
the inner court-^ihe Qilwat-ul-Isliim — the same proportion, their whole super 
at Delhi was the whole mosque as origin- ficial area being 72,000 ft. at Ajmir, as 
ally designed : yet before the death of compared with 152,000 ft. at Delhi. 



Chap. III. 


DELHI. 


»99 


10 miles, are seen the towers of Sh&hjah&n&bid, the modem 
capital, and till 1857 the seat of the nominal monarchy of the 
Great Mughal. Still further north are situated the civil station 
and ruins of the old British cantonments. It is a fortunate 
circumstance that the British station was not, as at Agra, placed 
in the midst of the ruins, since it is to this that we owe their 
preservation. But for the distance, marble columns would 
doubtless have been taken for all purposes for which they might 
have been available, without regard to their beauty, and the 
interest of the ruins thereby annihilated. Even as it is, the 
buildings belonging to the celebrated Sh&lim8r gardens, which 
were the only buildings of importance in the neighbourhood of 
the English station, have long since disappeared. 

The general arrangement of the principal ruins will be 
understood from the plan (Woodcut No. 369), which was taken 
with great care, though the scale to which it has been necessary 
to reduce it prevents all its peculiarities from being seen. The 
disposition of the various erections may first be briefly ex* 
plained: — The inner court on the west side is that of the 
original mosque of Qutbu-d-Dln, which measures 142 ft by 108 ft. 
within the corridors ; and in the middle of its west half the 
Iron pillar stands. The main entr&nce is under a dome, about 
20 ft. in diameter on the east side, along which runs a corridor 
supported on four rows of pillars, the back fow being placed 
against the walls, and in the north and south ends are two* 
storeyed pavilions. The side corridors had each three rows of 
pillars with an entrance on each side, though the gateway and 
all the western portion of the corridor has quite disappeared. 
About 20 yards of the eastern half of the wall remain and part 
of the colonnade, the pillars of which are of much plainer 
patterns than those of the other sides.^ The west end of this 
court is the great screen wall, 8 ft. thick, with its gigantic arches 
forming the entrances into the mosque itself which stood behind 
it and was 135 ft. in length by 32 ft. deep, but is now a complete 
ruin — only some twenty-two of the tall columns that supported 
its roof being left. Outside the south-east comer of the court 
stands the Qutb Min8r, erected at the same time.* 

Shamsu-d-Dtn Altamsh, about A.D. 1225, extended the great 

' Thu colonnade and its back wall “re-arrangement at the same time.”— 
were, “with a strange want of dis- Carr Stephen’s 'Aichaeolog^ of Delhi,* 
crimination, recenstmcted ” ty Major p. 43note. 

R. Smith, Executive Engineer, early in * ^e inscription on the east gateway 
last century, who used the pillars of of the mosque court gives its date as 
Altomsh’s extension in front of the ad. 1191 (or 1193), and another on the 
eastern gate of the mosque, for the north entrance says it “ was commenced ” 
purpose. And even the windows of in 1196.— Cunnfngham, 'Arcbseological 
Qntbn-d-Dtn’s wodi did not escape Reports,’ vol i. pp. 185-186. 



see 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. BookVII. 


screen both to the north and south by 1 19 ft, with five arched 
entrances in each section, which differ considerably in the 
details of their decoration as well as in size from those raised by 




369. Plan of Ruins at Old Delhi. (From a Plan by the Author. ) Scale zoo ft. to z in. 


Qutbu-d-Dtn. These were to be the facades of two extensions 
of die mosque ; and pairt of the back wall of the northern 
extension, with the positicfis of the cetitral and one of the side 
mihribs in it, still remain. Of the enlarged court, the south 
wall with its corridor, still exists, but only a few pillars of the 
east corridor from which we learn that the enlarged court with 



Chap. III. 


DELHI. 


aoi 


its colonnades would be about 370 ft. ftom north to south and 
230 ft from east to west, and so enclosing the Qutb Minftr. 
The tomb of Altamsh was built just to the west of the north end 
of the enlarged mosque. 1 

Again ’Aliu-d-Dtn Khalji (1296-1316) projected further 
extensions : he removed the east wall of Altamsh’s court about 
155 ft, extending the south wall and its colonnade so as to 
make the new court 385 ft from east to west, and constructing 
the beautiful 'AlSt-Darw&za on that side. Close to this gateway 
is the small tomb of Imim Muhammad ’Ali Zdmin, about 24 ft 
square, erected about 1535, of sandstone and marble. On the 
north the Sultin projected doubling the previous court — making 
it altogether over 700 ft. from north to south, and in this north 
half he began the ’A 1 &! MinAr which was intended to be of 
double the dimensions of the other; but besides this and the 
piers for the fa9ade of the extended mosque nothing more seems 
to have been done in this north extension. ’Aliu-d-Din’s tomb 
now in ruins is to the south-west of the enclosure. 

To understand the architecture, it is necessary to bear in 
mind that all the pillars are of Hindu, and all the walls of 
Muhammadan, architecture. 

It may possibly be questioned to what extent the pillars now 
stand as originally arranged by the HindQs. But it seems 
certain that they have all been re-arranged by the conquerors. 
And it is quite evident that the enclosing walls were erected 
by the Moslims, since all the stringcourses are covered with 
ornaments in their style, and ali the openings possess pointed 
arches, which the Hindus never used. On the whole, it thus 
seems that the entire structure was re-arranged in the form we 
now see it by the Muhammadans. The celebrated mosque 
at Kanauj was originally a Hindu or Jaina temple, and is re- 
arranged on a plan precisely similar to that of the mosque of 
’Amru at Old Cairo.^ The roof and domes are all of Jaina archi- 
tecture, so that no trace of the Moorish style is to be seen 
internally ; but the exterior is as purely of Muhammadan 
architecture. There is another mosque at Dh&r, near Mandh, of 
more modern date, and, doubtless, a re-arrangement of a HindO 
or Jaina temple. Another, in the fort at Jaunpur, as well as other 
mosques at Ahmad^ibid and elsewhere, all show the same system 
of taking down and re-arranging the materials on a different plan. 
If, therefore, the pillars at the Qutb ynre in situ, the case would 
be exceptional ; ^ but I cannot, nevertheless, help suspecting that 

* ‘ History of Ancient and Medieval tion on the wall recording that twenty- 

Architecture,’ vol. ii. Woodcut No. 977 seven temples of the Hindds had ben 
(p. 526). pulled down to provide materials for this 

* Gen. Cunningham found an inscrip- mosque (‘Archaeological Reports,’ vol. i. 



aoa 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE, Book VII. 


the two-storeyed pavilions in the anglra, and those behind the 
screen, may perhaps be’a'S originally ererted ; but to this we will 
return when speaking of the -Ajmlr mosque, where the Hindfl 
pillars are probably all re-arranged. It is quite certain, how- 
ever, that some of the pillars at the Qutb are made up of 
dissimilar fragments, and all were placed where they now stand 
by the builders of the mosque. It may, however, be necessary 
to. explain that there could be no difficulty in taking down and 
rebuilding these erections, because the joints of the pillars are all 
fitted with the precision that HindO patience alone could give. 
Each compartment of the roof is composed of nine stones — four 
architraves, four angular and one central slab (as explained in 
diagram No. 1^4. vol. i., p. 314), all so exactly fitted, and so in- 
dependent of cement, as easily to be taken down and put up 
again. The same is true of the domes, all which being honestly 
and fairly fitted, would suffer no damage from the process of 
removal and re-erection. 

The section (Woodcut No. 370), of one half of the principal 
colonnade (the one facing the great series of arches) will explain 



370. Section oi part of East Colonnade at the Qutb, Old Delhi. Scale 25 ft. to i in. 


its form better than words can do. It is so purely Jaina in 
arrangement, that it should, perhaps, have been mentioned in 
speaking of that style; but as forming a part of the earliest 
mosque in India, it is more' appropriately introduced in this 
place. The pillars are of the same order as those used on 
Mount Abfi (Woodcut No. 284), except that those at Delhi are 
much richer and more elaborate. Most of them probably 
belong to the iith or 12th century, and are among the few 

p. 176). This, however, proves little, Ranpar near Sudaii would supply a 
i^en we know what the temples were sufficiency for the whole mosque, and 
like which were destroyed for this pur* though the latter is more modem, we 
ppae. Twenty-seven temples like those have no reason for supposing that 
a^ Khajarftho, excelling the Ghantai, similar temples did not exist before 
wptdd not provide piliars for one half Muhammadan times, 
thh hmar oonrt. One temple like that at 


Chap. III. 


DELHI. 


303 


specimens to be found in India that seem to be overloaded with 
ornament There is not one inch of plain surface from the 
capital to the base, except the pillars behind the screen, and 
some others which may belong to older buildings. Still the 
ornament is so sharp and so cleverly executed, and the effect, in 
their present state of decay and ruin, so picturesque, that it is 
very difficult to find fault with what is so beautiful. In some 
in.stances the figures that were on the shafts of the pillars have 
been cut off, as offensive to Muhammadan strictness with regard 
to images ; but on the roof and less seen parts, the cross>legged 
figures of the Jaina saints, and other emblems of that religion, 
may still be detected. 

The glory of the mosque, however, is not in these Hindil 
remains, but in the great range of arches of the screen wall on 
the western side, extending north and south for about 385 ft, 
and consisting of three greater and eight smaller arches ; the 
central one 22 ft. wide and 53 ft. high ; th^ larger side-arches 
24 ft. 4 in., and about the same height as the central arch ; the 
smaller arches, which are unfortunately much ruined, arc about 
half these dimensions (Woodcut No. 371). The central part of 
this screen, 147 ft. in length, forming the mosque proper, is 
ascribed to Qutbu-d-Din after his return from Ghaznt. Behind 
this, at the distance of 32 ft., are the foundations of the wall that 
formed the back of the mo.sque, but was only intended, apparently, 
to be carried as high as the roof of the Hindfi pillars it encloses. 
It seems probable that the Hindti pillars between the two 
screens were the only part proposed to be roofed in 1 196, since 
some of them are built into the back part of the great arches, 
and all above them is quite plain and smooth, without the least 
trace of any intention to construct a vault or roof of any sort. 
Indeed, a roof is by no means an essential part of a place of 
prayer ; a wall facing Mecca is all that is required, and in India 
is frequently all that is built, though an enclosure is often added 
in front to protect the worshippers from interruption. Roofed 
colonnades ar^, of course, convenient and ornamental accom- 
paniments, yet far from being indispensable. 

The history of th|s mosque, as told in its construction, is 
as curious as anything about it. It seems that the Afgh&n 
conquerors had a tolerably distinct idea that pointed arches 
were the true form for architectural openings ; but they left the 
Hindu architects and builders whom they employed to follow 
their own devices as to the mode of carrying out the form. The 
Hindfis up to this time had never built arches — nor, indeed, did 
they for centuries afterwards. Accordingly, they proceeded to 
make the pointed openings on the same principle upon which 
they built their domes. They carried them up in horizontal 



804 INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 

cour^ as far as they could, and then closed them by long slabs 
meeting at the top, the construction being, in fact, that of the 
arch of the aqueduct at Tusculum.^ The same architects were 
employed by their masters to ornament the faces of these 
arches ; and this they did by copying and repeating the 
ornaments on the pillars and friezes on the opposite sides of the 



371. Central Range ot Arches at the Qutb Mosque. Ihrom a Sketch by the Author.) 


court, cbvering the whole with a lace-work of intricate and 
delicate carving, such as no other mosque, except that at Ajmir, 
ever received before or since ; and which— though perhaps in a 
great measure thrown away when used on such a scale— is, 
without exception, the most exquisite specimen of its class 


* As shown in ‘History of Ancient 
and Medieval Architecture,^ vol. i. 
(Woodcut No. 17S), p. 301. This' mode 
of construction is only feasible when 
much laieer stones are used than were 
hm wjnoyed. The consequence was 
that the arch had become seriously 


crippled when I saw and sketched it. 
It has since been carefully restored by 
Government. The two great side arches 
either were never completed, or have 
fallen down in consequence of the &lse 
mode of construction. 




Chap. III. 


DELHI. 


905 


known to exist anywhere. The stone being particularly hard 
and good, the carving retains its freshness to the present day, 
and is only destroyed above the 
arches, where the faulty HindQ 
construction has superinduced pre- 
mature decay. 

The Qutb Min&r, or great 
minaret at the south-east corner 
of the hrst mosque, is 48 ft 4 in. 
in diameter at the base, and, when 
measured in 1794, was 242 ft. in 
height^ Even then, however, its 
capital was ruined, so that some 
10 ft, or perhaps 20 ft, must be 
added to this to complete its 
original elevation. It is orna- 
mented by four boldly-projecting 
balconies ; one at 97 ft, the second 
at 148 ft., the third at 188 ft, and 
the fourth at 214 ft. from the 
ground ; between which are richly- 
sculptured raised belts containing 
inscriptions.^ In the lower storey 
the twenty - four projecting ribs 
which form the flutes are alter- 
nately angular and circular ; in 
the second circular, and in the third 
angular only. Above this the 
minir is plain, and principally of 
white marble, with belts of the 
same red sandstone of which the 
three lower storeys are composed 
(Woodcut No. 372). 

It is not clear whether the gmbMinar. 

angular flutings are copied from (From a Sketch by the Author.) 

some peculiarity found in the 

minarets at KhurdsSn and further westward, or whether they 
are derived from the forms of the temples of the Jains. The 

^ * Asiatic Researches,’ vol. iv. p. 313. titles and oraise of Muhammad ibn SAm 
Its height, according to Gen. Cunning- (1193-1206); the third, a verse from 
ham, ,is (after the remox-al of the modern Sura 59 of the QorAn ; the fourth as in 
pavilion) 238 ft. 1 in. — * Archseolc^cal the second ; the fifth, 97 Arabic names 
Reports,^ vol. i. p. 196. of God ; and the sixth a verse from Sura 

^ On the basement storey are six 2 of the QorAn. The place for the call 
bands of inscriptions— the lowest con- to prayer was upon the second storey.— 
tains the designation and titles of Qutbu- Carr Stephens, * Archaeology of Delhi,’ 
d-Din Ibak (1206-1210); the second, the pp. 58!. 




INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Boor VII. 


*o6 

forms of the bases of the minarets at Ghaznt appear to lend 
probability to the first hypothesis ; but the star-like form of 
many temples — principally Jaina — in Mysore and elsewhere 
(aMt€, vol. I, pp. 439 e/ seqq.) would seem to countenance the idea 
of their being of Hindfi origin. No star-like forms have yet, 
however, been found so far north, and their destruction has 
been too complete for us to hope that they may be found now. 
Be this as it may, it is probably not too much to assert that 
the Qutb Min&r is the most beautiful example of its class 
known to exist anywhere. The rival that w'ill occur at once 
to most people is the campanile at Florence, built by Giotto. 
That is, it is true, 30 ft. taller, but it is crushed by the mass 
of the cadiedral alongside ; and, beautiful though it is, it wants 
that poetry of design and exquisite finish of detail which marks 
every moulding of the minir. It might have been better if 
the slope of the sides had been at a higher angle, but that is 
only apparent when seen at a distance ; when viewed from the 
court of the mosque its form is perfect, and, under any aspect, is 
preferable to the prosaic squareness of the outline of the Italian 
example. 

The only Muhammadan building known to be taller than 
this is the minaret of the mosque of Hasan, at Cairo ; ^ but as 
the pillar at Old Delhi is a wholly independent building, it 
has a far npbler appearance, and both in design and finish far 
surpasses not* only its Egyptian rival, but any building of its 
class known to me in the whole world. This, however, must 
not be looked at as if erected for the same purposes as those 
usually attached to mosques elsewhere. It was designed, but 
perhaps not solely, as a place from which the mu’azzin should 
call to prayers, though its lower gallery was used for that 
purpose, but probably also as a tower of Victory — a Jaya 
Staihbha — in fact an emblem of conquest, which the HindOs 
could only too easily understand and appreciate. 

At the distance of 470 ft. north of this one a second minir 
was commenced in 1311, by ’A 14 u-d-Dtn Khalji, of twice its 
dimensions, or 254 ft in circumference. It was only carried up 
to the height of 75 ft. above the plinth, and abandoned, probably 
in consequence of the death of its founder in 1316.^ 

The date of all these buildings is known with sufficient 
exactness from the inscriptions which they bear,* from which it 

’ ‘Histoix of Ancient and Medieval Ndsiri,’pp. 621-622, notes. The tomb or 
Arehitectore,* vol. ii. p. 532, and Wood- Dargah of Khwijah Qntb Sthib stands 
cut No. 9^2. about three furlongs S.S.W. from the 

* It Iw -been supposed that it was min&rs. 
eneted |n .memory of Qutbu-d-DIn > Translated by Walter Ewer, ‘ Asiatic 
BeUt^ir Xikl of Ush, a notable Researches,' vol. siv. p. 480. See also 
Muhmasiadan Ptr or saint, who died Cunningham, ‘Archaeological Reports,* 
here in 1235— Raverty’s ‘Tabaq&t-i- vol. i. pp. 



Chap. III. 


DELHI. 


307 


appears that the inner court was enclosed by Shih&bu*d-Dtn. 
The central range of arches (Woodcut No. 371) was built by 
Qutbu>d-D!n ; the wings by Altamsh, whose tomb is behind the 



373. Iron Pillar at the Qutb. (From a Photograph.) 

The dotted line shows the extent below the ground. 


northern range, and the Qutb Min&r was either bliilt or fini^ed 
by the same monarch ; they extend, therefore, from A.D. 1 1 ^ to 
1235, at which date they were left incomplete, probably in con- 
sequence of the death of the last-named king. 



3o8 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


One of the most interesting objects connected with this 
mosque is the iron pillar which stands in its courtyard (Woodcut 
No. 373). It stands 22 ft. above the ground, and as the depth 
under the pavement 7 s now ascertained to be only 20 in., the 
total height is 23 ft. 8 in.^ Its diameter at the base is 16.4 in., 
and at the capital 12.05 'I'he capital is 3^ ft. high, and 
is sharply and clearly wrought into the Persian form that makes 
it look as if it belonged to an earlier period than it does ; and it 
has the amalaka moulding, which is indicative of considerable 
antiquity. It has not, however, been yet correctly ascertained 
what its age really is. There is an inscription upon it, but 
without a date. From the form of its alphabet, Prinsep ascribed 
it to the 3rd or 4th century ; ^ Bhau Daji, on the same evidence, 
to the end of the Sth or beginning of the 6th century.® My own 
conviction is that it belongs to one of the Chandra Rdjas of the 
Gupta dynasty, either consequently about A.D. 370 or A.D. 415. 

Taking A.D. 400 as a mean date — and it certainly is not far 
from the truth — it opens our eyes to an unsuspected state of 
affairs to find the Hindis at that age capable of forging a bar of 
iron larger than any that have been forged even in Europe up 
to a very late date, and not frequently even now. As we find 
them, however, some centuries afterwards, using bars as long as 
this lit in roofing the porch of the temple at Kanirak {ante, 
p. 107), we must now believe that they were much more familiar 
with the use of this metal than they afterwards became. It is 
almost equally startling to find that, after an exposure to wind 
and rain for fourteen centuries, it is unrusted, and the capital 
and inscription are as clear and as sharp now as when put up 
fifteen centuries ago.® 


^ It is a carious illustration how diffi- 
cult it sometimes is to obtain coriect 
information in India, that when Gen. 
Cunningham published his * Reports’ in 
1871, he stated, apparently on the 
authority of Mr Cooper, Deputy Com- 
missioner, that an excavation bad been 
carried down to a depth of a6ft., but 
without reaching the bottom. * ^ The man 
in charge, however ,” — tifwnn oculaire 
— ** assured him that the actual depth 
reached was 35 ft.”— Vol. i. p. 169. He 
^onseouently estimated the whole length 
.t 60 It., but fortunately ordered a new 
excavation, determined to reach the 
bottom — qui coAte — and found it at 
ao inches below the sur&ce. — ^Vol. iv. 
p. d8, phkte 5. At a distance of a few 
inches oelow the surface it expands in a 
bojiboas form to a diameter of 2 A. 4 in., 
and rests on a gridiron of iron bars, 


I which are fastened with lead into the 
stone pavement. 

^ * Journal of the Asiatic Society of 
Bengal,’ vol. vii. p. 629. 

“ 'Tournal Bombay Branch of the 
Royal Asiatic Society,’ vol. x. p. 63. 
Dr Fleet in ‘Inscriptions of the Early 
Guptas,’ pp. I39f. gives a revised version. 
It bears a posthumous inscription in 
eulogy of the conquests of a king Chandra 
as to whose date or dynasty nothing is 
stated. 

* There is no mistake about the 
MeharauU pillar being of pure iron. 
Gen. Cunningham had a bit of it ana- 
lysed in India by Dr. Murray, and 
another portion was analysed in the 
School of Mines here by Dr. Percy. 
Both found it pure malleable iron with- 
out any alloy. 




TOMBS BEYOND THE COURTYARD AT GOLKONDA 




MOSQUE OF SHER SHAH IN PURAnA KILA, DELHI 






TOMB OF NAWAB SAFDAR JANG, NEAR DELHI 















[From a Photograph.] THE KYAUKTAUGYI TEMPLE, AMARAPURA 










THE ANANDA TEMPLE, PAGAN. 




Chap. III. 


DELHI. 


209 


As the inscription informs us the pillar was dedicated to 
Vishnu, there is little doubt that it originally supported a figure 
of Garuda on the summit, which the Muhammadans of course 
removed ; but the real object of its erection was as a dhwaja or 
standard of the god Vishnu and to record the “ defeat of the 
V^hlikas,^ across the seven mouths of the Sindhu,” or Indus. 
It is, to say the least of it, a curious coincidence, that eight 
centuries afterwards men from that same Baktrian country 
should have erected 
a Jaya Stambha ten 
times as tall as this 
one, in the same 
courtyard,to celebrate 
their victory over the 
descendants of those 
Hindus who so long 
before had expelled 
their ancestors from 
the country. 

I mmediately behind 
the north-west corner 
of the mosque stands 
the tomb of Altamsh, 
the founder. Though 
small — being a room 
29 ft. 6 in. square 
inside, with walls 7^ 
ft. thick and doors 
on the four sides — it 
is one of the richest 
examples of Hindu 
art applied to 
Muhammadan pur- 
poses that Old Delhi 
affords, and is ex- 
tremely beautiful, 
though the builders 
still display a certain degree of inaptness in fitting the details 
to their new purposes. The effect at present is injured by the 
want of a roof, which has long since disappeared. In additior 
to the beauty of its details it is interesting as being the oldest 
tomb known to exist in India. He died A.D. 1235.* 

' Can these Vahlikas be the Indo- understood. 

Skythians by overthrowing whom the - Carr Stephen’s Archicolo^ of 
Guptas must have risen to power ? In Delhi,’ pp. 74-75 » Fanshawe’s * Delhi 
Sanskrit literature, by Vahlikas the Past and Present,’^ pp. 269, 270. 
people of Baktria or Balkh are usually 



374. Interior of a Tomb at Old Delhi. (From 
a Sketch by the Author.) 


no 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


A more beautiful example than even this is the ’AlAt- 
Darw&za, shown on the left hand of the plan (Woodcut No. 369). 
It was erected by 'Alftu-d-D!n Khalji, and the date 1310 is found 
among its inscriptions. It is, therefore, about a century more 
modem than the other buildings of the place, and displays the 
so-called Path&n ^ style at its period of greatest perfection, when 
the Hindi! masons had learned to fit their exquisite style of 
decoration to the forms of their foreign masters. Its walls 
are decorated internally with a diaper pattern of unrivalled 
excellence, and the mode in which the square is changed into an 
octagon is more simply eluant and appropriate than any other 
example I am acquainted with in India (Plate XXIX.).* The 
pendentives accord perfectly with the pointed openings in the 
four other faces, and are in every respect appropriately con- 
structive.* True there are defects. For instance, they are rather 
too plain for the elaborate diapering which covers the whole of 
the lower part of the building both internally and externally ; 
but ornament might easily have been added ; and their plainness 
accords with the simplicity of the dome, which is indeed by no 
means worthy of the substructure. Not being pierced with 
windows, it seems as if the architect assumed that its plainness 
would not be detected in the gloom that in consequence prevails. 

This building, though small — it b only 56 fe 9 in. square 
externally, vand with an internal apartment only 34 ft. 6 in. in 
plan — marks the culminating point of this Path&n style in 
Delhi. Nothing so complete had been done before, nothing so 
ornate was attempted by them afterwards. In the provinces 
wonderful buildings were erected between this period and the 
Mughal conquest, but in the capital their edifices were more 
marked hy solemn gloom and nakedness than by ornamentation 
or any 91 the higher graces of architectural art. Externally it 
is a good deal damaged, but its effect is still equal to that of 
any building of its class in India. It was copied, with some 
m^ifications, in the gateway to the fine Khairpur Mosque, near 
Safdar Kh&n’s tomb, erected under Sikandar Lodt in 1494. 

AjmIr. 

The mosque at Ajmtr (Woodcut No. 375) was commenced 
apparently in the year 1200, and was certainly completed during 

^ Major Ravertyhas ihown that the * From Fanshawe’s * Delhi,’ p. 270: 
nameof*'Pathln8 ’’does not apply to the ’The tame form of p^endve is 

first six dynasties of Sultftns of Delhi, found at Serbistani nearly nine centuries 
who were ** Turkish slaves, Khaljis, Jats, before this time.-—* History of Ancient 
low caste Hindfis and Seyyids.” We and Medieval Architecture, 3rd ed. vol. 
■owe the blander to the translators of i. p. 196, Woodcut No. 259^ Conf. R. 
Fli^ta.— 'Journal of the Ana^c Sodety Phene Spiers, 'Architecture East and 
of Bmigali’ vol. sliv. pp. 24 sf isyy. West,’ pp. 65 sf siff. 



CH4P. III. AJMIR. 21 1 

the veign of Altamsh, A.D. 1211-1235.^ According to tradition, 
it was finished in two days and a half ; hence the only name 



375. Mosque at Ajmlr, (Plan as restored by Gen. Cunningham, 1864.) 
Scale 100 ft. to z in. 


which it is now known — the “ Arhai dtn ka Jhompr 4 ,” which, 
if it means anything, can only apply to the clearing away of 
the Hindi! temples and symbols, to provide materials for the 
erection of a magnificent mosque to the glory of the iconoclast 
conquerors and their self-exalting creed of IsUm. It stands on 
the outskirts of the city at the base of Tilr&gadh hill. Like the 
remains at Old Delhi, the entire plan is Moslim, whilst the 
columns and roofs are the spoils of Hindfi temples. At first 
sight the plan, with its large cloistered court, bears a resem- 
blance to that of a Jaina temple; and the octagonal arrangement 
of the pillars for the support of the roofs, might seem to 
support the comparison.* But like many others elsewhere this 
formed an enclosure, about 262 ft. square outside,* with towers at 
the comers, to be surrounded on the north, east, and south sides, 
by open cloisters raised on Hindd pillars, now almost quite 

^Cunningham, 'Archaeological Re- ^ General Cunningham’s measurements 
ports,’ vol. li. p. 261. and his plan do not agree. He gives the 

‘ Tod, in his * Annals,’ treats it simply outside length from- north to south as 

as a Jaina temple, without referring to 272 ft. 6 in., and next page the exterior 

any possible alterations, except additions length of the mosque as 259 ft. ; but the 

m^e by Moslim architects, vol. i. p. 779 » plftQ makes the outside dimensions equal, 

see also his plate, which is sin^larly whilst his measurement from east to west 

correct. is 264 ft. 6 in. 



iti INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VIl. 

ruined. The principal entrance is, of course, on the east side, 
but there was another on the south with a projecting porch. The 
north side is built close to the scarped rock of the hill. The 
open court would be about 200 ft. wide by 175 ft. ^o the front 
of the Masjid on its west side, which is the only part now 
standing; and Woodcut No. 376 shows all that now exists 



376. Plan of Ajmtr Mosque as it exists (from a drawing by Mr. H. Cousens). 
Scale 100 ft. to I in. 


of the mosque itself. No tower at the north-west corner 
probably ever existed, whilst that at the south-west has been 
the shrine of a small Hindu temple of which the .rikhara 
was demolished ; but the small bastions on the east corners 
of the court are Muhammadan and of the same plan as the 
turrets over the central piers of the screen. The corridor 
on the east has been rebuilt but of much less width than is 
shown on the restored plan; of the north corridor there is no 
trace, and only the wall of the south one is left. What 
remains, however, is sufficient to show that, if completed, it 
must originally have been a singularly elegant specimen of an 
early Indian mosque. The roof extends only over six of the 
front piers, or about 141 ft, beyond which about 54 ft at 
each end is quite open and even unpaved. Behind the screen 
piers the area of the mosque is 40 ft 8 in. deep. The roof 
is supported by four rows of lofty shafts and another of pilasters 
(or pillars built into the back wall) — 70 in all — each formed 
of three superimposed Hindil pillars. These are arranged as in 
Jaina and Hindu temples so as to support on eight pillars 
each the roof and its five domes, or rather, conical roofs, which 
are all that exist^ 

The glory, however, of this mosque, as of that of the Qutb, is 
the screen of seven arches with which Altamsh adorned the 
courtyard (Woodcut No. 377). Its dimensions are very similar 
to those of its rival. The central arch is 22 ft. 2 in. wide ; the 
two on each side 13 ft. 3 in., and those at the ends 13 ft. 4 in. 
and 12 ft. 8 in. Each arch is surrounded by three lines of 


* The outer form of these early domes, 
in conformity with their interiors, being 
conical, was regarded as ugly, and the 


Arch.\.-ological Survey replaced tliem a 
few years ago by " better shaped hemi- 
spherical ones.'’* 




Chap. III. AJMIR. 313 

writing, the outer in the Kufic and the other two in Arabic 
character, and divided from each other by bands of Arabesque 
ornament boldly and clearly cut, and still as sharp as when first 



377. Great Arch in Mosque at Ajmlr. (From a Photograph.) 


chiselled. In the centre the screen rises to a height ot 56 ft., 
and on it are the ruins of two small minarets io| ft. in diameter, 
ornamented with alternate circular and angular flutes, as in the 
lower storey of the Qutb. It is not clear whether anything of 
the same sort existed at Delhi — probably not, as the great minflr 
may have served for that purpose, and their introduction here 




az4 INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 

looks like an afterthought, and the production of an unpractised 
hand working in an unfamiliar style. Wherever and whenever 
minSrs were afterwards introduced, preparations for them were 
always made from the foundations, and their lines are always 
carried down to the ground, in some shape or other, as in true 
art they ought to be. This solecism, if it may be so called, 
evidently arose from the architects teing HindOs, unfamiliar 
with the style; and to this also is due the fact that all the 
arches are constructed on the horizontal principle. There is 
not a true arch in the place ; but, owing to their having the 
command of larger stones than were available at Delhi, the 
arches are not here crippled, as they were there before the 
repairs. 

It is neither, however, its dimensions nor design that makes 
this screen one of the most remarkable architectural objects in 
India, but the mode in which it is decorated. Nothing can 
exceed the taste with which the K6ft and Tughr& inscriptions 
are interwoven with the more purely architectural decorations, 
or the manner in which they give life and variety to the whole, 
without ever interfering with the constructive lines of the design. 
As before remarked, as examples of surface-decoration, these 
two mosques of Altamsh at Delhi and Ajmir are probably 
unrivalled. Nothing in Cairo or in Persia is so exquisite in 
detail, and nothing in Spain or Syria can approach them for 
beauty of surface-decoration. Besides this, they are unique. 
Nowhere else would it be possible to find Muhammadan large- 
ness of conception, combined with Hindi! delicacy of ornamenta- 
tion, carried .out to the same extent and in the same manner. 
If to this we add their historical value as the first mosques 
erected in India, and their ethnographic importance as bringing 
out the leading characteristics of the two races in so distinct and 
marked a manner, there are certainly no two buildings in India 
that better deserve the protecting care of Government ; the one 
has received its fair share of attention ; the other has, till quite 
lately, been most shamefully neglected, and most barbarously 
ill-tseated.^ 


Later PathAn Style. 

After the death of ’Alflu-d-Dtn'(A.D. 1316) a change seems 
to have come over the spirit 0/ the architects of the succeeding 
Tughlaq Shiht and Sayyid dynasties, and all their subsequent 
buildings, down to the time of the Afgh&n Sher Shflh, a.d. 

^ Owing to the Muhammadan part being some thirt^*five years ago. 

better wit and with larger materials, the Tnere is, so far as I can judge, no building 
inosque is not in the same ruinous condi- in India more worthy of the attention of 
tion as that at the Qutb was before the Government than this, 



Chap. III. LATER PATHAN STYLE. ai5 

1539, exhibit a stem simplicity of design, in marked contrast 
to the elaborate ornamentation with which they bqgan. It 
is not clear whether this arose from any puritanical reaction 
against the quasi-Hinduism of the earlier examples, or from 
any political causes, the effect of which it is now difficult 
to trace: but, certain it is, that when that stem old warrior, 
Tughlaq Sh&h, A.D. 1321, founded the New Delhi, which still 
bears his name — Tughlaq&bUd — all his buildings are char- 
acterised by a severe simplicity, in marked contrast with those 
which his predecessors erected in the capital that overlooks 
the plain in which his citadel is situated. His tomb, which 
was finished at least, if not built, by his successor, instead of 
being situated in a garden, as is usually the case, stands by 
itself in a strongly-fortified citadel of its own, surrounded by 
an artificial lake. The sloping walls and almost Egyptian 
solidity of this mausoleum, combined with the bold and massive 
towers of the fortifications that surround it, form a model of a 
warrior’s tomb hardly to be rivalled anywhere, and in singular 
contrast with the elegant and luxuriant garden-tombs of the 
more settled and peaceful dynasties that succeeded. 

The change, however, of most interest from a historical 
point of view is, that by the time of Tughlaq Sh&h’s reign, 
the Moslims had worked themselves entirely free from Hindi! 
influence. In his buildings all the arches are true arches; all 
the details invented for the place where they are found. His 
tomb, in fact, would be as appropriate — more so, indeed — 
if found in the valley of the Nile than on the banks of the 
Jamni ; and from that time forward Muhammadan architecture 
in India was a new and complete style in itself, and developed 
according to the natural and inevitable sequences of true styles 
in all parts of the world. 

It is true, nevertheless, that in their tombs, as well as in 
their mosques, they frequently, to save themselves trouble, used 
Hindi! materials when they were available, and often with the 
most picturesque effect. Many of these compound edifices are 
composed of four pillars only, surmounted by a small dome ; 
but frequently they adopt with the pillars -the Jaina anange- 
ment of twelve pillars, so placed as to support an octagonal 
framework, easily moulded into a circular basement for a dome. 
This, as before observed, is the arrangement- of the tomb at 
Mylassa, and the formative idea of all that is beautiful in the 
plans of Jaina and northern HindQ buildings in India. 

One example must suffice to explain the effect of these 
buildings (Woodcut No. 378). It is at Siprt, about 70 miles 
south-south-west from G&wliar. At first sight the dome looks 
rather heavy for the substructure; but the effect of the whole 



ti6 INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


is so picturesque that it is difficult to find fault with it. If 
all the materials were original, the design would be open to 



378. Tomb at Siprt, GwAliar State. (From a Sketch by the Author.) 


criticism ; but, when a portion is avowedly borrowed, a slight 
want of balance between the parts may be excused. 

There are several examples of tombs of this sort at the 
Bakartyi Kund in Benares, evidently made up from ancient 
materials;^ and, indeed, wherever the Muhammadans fairly 
settled themselves on a site previously occupied by the Hindus, 
Jains, or Buddhists, such combinations are frequent; but 
no attegipt is ever made to assimilate the parts that «e 
lyiuhammadan with those belonging to the Hindd style which 
they are employing ; they are of the age in which the tomb 
or mosque was built, and that age, consequently, easily recog- 
nisable by any one familiar with the style. 

The usual form of a Pathan tomb will be better understood 
from the following woodcut (No. 379), representing a nameless 
sepulchre ‘ among the hundreds that still strew the plains of 

» ‘Jonmal of ihe Asiatic Society of died 1443, but to whom SayyM Ahmad 
Beneal,’ vol. xxxiv. pp. i tt seoq., plates ascribes another octagonal tomb to the 
l.g, north-east of the mosque.— Cunning- 

* Cunningham says it is ascribed to ham’s ‘ Archasological Reports,’ vol. xx. 
Iifubfirak Kh 4 n Pathan; Mr Fanshawe pp. 158, 159 i and Fanshawe’s ‘Delhi, 
assigns it to Mohammad Shah IV., who ^ 244. 


Chap. III. 


LATER PATHAN STYLE. 


317 


Old Delhi. It stands at the village of Khairpur, about 3 miles 
south from the Ajmtr gate of Delhi, and on the south-west of the 



Tomb at Khairpur, Old Delhi, (From a Sketch by the Author.) 


mosque. It consists of an octagonal apartment, 31 ft. 10 in. 
inside diameter, surrounded by a verandah following the same 
form — the base being 72 ft. 2 in. in diameter — each face being 
ornamented by three arches of the stilted pointed form generally 
adopted by the PathAns, or rather Sayyids, and it is supported 
by rectangular pillars, which are almost as universal with 
them as this form of arch. It is a form evidently borrowed 
from the square pier of the -Jains, but so altered and so 
simplified, that it requires some ' ingenuity to recognise its 
origin in its new combination. 

Another octagonal tomb, to the north-east of the mosque, 
is built in the same style and of almost exactly the same 
dimensions; and the tomb of Mubftrak Sh&h II. (murdered in 
1434) at Kotila or Mub&rakpur, about a mile and a half south of 
Khairpur, is also of the same pattern and size. It is the earliest 
of those in the later Path&n style.^ 

This series of tombs closes with ♦hat of Sher Sh&h (iS39* 


*■ A plan it given in Cunningham’s ' Arcbteological Reports, vol. xx. plate 35. 


ai8 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


1545) (Woodcut No. 380), the most illustrious of his race. It 

is situated on a terrace 30 ft. high and 
about 300 ft. square, in the middle of 
a large tank, near Sahsarftm, in Sh&h- 
8b8d, and, from its locality and its 
design, is now a singularly picturesque 
object (Woodcut No. 381). Its dimen- 
sions too are considerable.^ Its base is 
an octagon, 56 ft. on each side externally, 
or 135 ft. in diameter. A gallery, 10 
ft 2 in. wide, surrounds the central 
apartment, which is surmounted by 
a large dome 71 ft in djameter, be- 
neath which stands the tomb of the 
founder and of some of his favourite companions in arms. 



380. Tomb of Shor ShAh 
at SahsarAm. 
Scale 100 ft. to X in. 



381. Tomb of Sher ShAh at SahsarAm. (From a Photograph.) 

On the exterior, the terrace on which it stands is ornamented 


* Cunningham’s * Archaeological Reports/ vol. xi. p. 135. 




Chap. III. 


LATER PATHAN STYLE. 


919 


by bold octagonal pavilions in the angles, which support appro- 
priately the central dome, and the little bracketed kiosks 
between them break pleasingly the outline. In the same 
manner the octagonal kiosks that cluster round the drum of 
the dome, and the dome itself, relieve the monotony of the 
composition without detracting from its solidity or apparent 
solemnity. Altogether, as a royal tomb of the second class, 
there are few that surpass it in India, either for beauty of 
outline or appropriateness of detail. Originally it was con- 
nected with the mainland by a bridge, which fortunately was 
broken down before the grand trunk road passed near.. But 
for this, it would probably have been utilised long ago.^ 

The mosques of these SultSns bore the same aspect as their 
tombs. The so-called Kala or Kal&n Masjid in the present city 
of Delhi, and finished, according to an inscription on its walls, 
in A.D. 1387, is in a style not unlike the tomb (Woodcut No. 379), 
but more massive, and even less ornamented. This severe 
simplicity seems to have been the characteristic of the latter 
part of the 14th century, and may have been a protest of the 
more puritanical Moslim spirit against the HindQ exuberance 
which characterised both the 13th and the 15th centuries. A 
reaction, however, took place, and the later style of Delhi was 
hardly less rich, and certainly far more appropriate for the 
purposes to which it was devoted than the first style, as 
exhibited in the buildings at the Qutb. 

This, however, was principally owing to the exceptional 
splendour of the reign of Sher Sh&b, who, however, is so mixed 
up both in date and in association with the earlier Mughals, 
that it is difficult to discriminate between them. Though Bcibar 
conquere'd India in A.D. 1526, his succe.ssor, Humiyfin, was 
defeated and driven from the throne by Sher ShSh in A.D. 1 540, 
and it was only in A.D. 1555 that the Mughal dynasty was 
finally and securely established at Delhi. The style conse- 
quently of the first half of the i6th century may be considered 
as the last expiring effort of the PathSns, or the first dawn of 
that of the great Mughals, and it was well worthy of either. 

At this age the facades of these mosques became far more 
ornamental, and more frequently encrusted with marbles, and 
always adorned with sculpture of a rich and beautiful character ; 
the angles of the buildings were also relieved by little kiosks, 
supported by four richly bracketed pillars, but never with 

’ In the 'Journal of Indian Art and Gumbaz. It ii I15 It. sq., the central 
Industry,’ vol. v. m, 49, 50, and plates apartment being 40 ft. sq., surrounded 
58-64, the late Mr £. W. Smith has ^ven by a double corridor of forty grmned 
a carefully illustrated account of a ruined areas, the rooft supported on massive 
tomb at kftlpi, known as the Chaurisi piers. 



aao 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


minarets, which, so far as I know, were not attached to mosques 
during the so-called Pathdn period. The call to prayer was 
made from the roof; and, except the first rude attempt at 
Ajmtr, I do not know an instance of a minaret built solely for 
such a purpose, though they were, as we know, universal in 
Egypt and elsewhere long before this time, and were considered 
nearly indispensable in the buildings of the Mughals very shortly 
afterwards. The Pathdns seem to have regarded the minflr as 
the Italians viewed the Campanile, more as a symbol of power 
and of victory than as an adjunct to a house of worship. 

The body of the mosque became generally an oblong 
hall, with a central dome flanked by two others of the same 
horizontal dimensions, but not so lofty, and separated from it 
by a broad, bold arch, the mouldings and decorations of which 
formed one of the principal ornaments of the building. 

The pendentives were even more remarkable than the arches 



38a. PendentJve from Mosque at Old Delhi. (From a Sketch by the Author.) 

for elaborateness of detail. Their forms are so various that it 
is impossible to classify or describe them ; perhaps the most 
usual is that represented in Woodcut No 382, where the angle is 



Chap. tll. 


LATER PATHAN STYLE. 


S3l 


filled up with a number of small imitations of arches, bracketing 
out one beyond the other. It might seem probable that this 
scheme of decoration was based on the honeycomb or stalactite 
vault used by the Arabs in Spain ; but here the pendentive is 
differently constructed from the Arab pendentives, which are 
curved in plan, whilst this is simply a comer bracket^ 

If it were not that the buildings of the earlier Sult&ns are so 
completely eclipsed by the greater splendour of those of the 
Mughal dynasty, which succeeded them in their own capitals, 
their style would have attracted more attention than has 
hitherto been bestowed upon it ; and its monograph would be 
as interesting as any that the Indian-Saracenic affords. In its 
first period the style was characterised by all the richness which 
Hindi! elaboration could bestow ; in the second by a stem 
simplicity and grandeur much more appropriate, according to 
our ideas, to the spirit of the people ; and during the latter part 
of its existence, by a return to the elaborateness of the past ; . 
but at this period every detail was fitted to its place and its 
purpose. We forget the Hindi! except in his delicacy, and we 
recognise in this last development one of the completed 
architectural styles of the world. 

^ R. Phene Spiers, * Architecture — East and West,' pp. 34* 35* 



CHAPTER IV. 
JAUNPUR. 
CONTENTS. 

Jimi’ Masjid and L&l Darw&za. 


CHRONOLOGY. 

Khwdja-i-Jah&n assumes inde- MahmM Sh&h Sharqt . A.D. 1440 

pendence at Jaunpor . a.d. 1394 Husain Sh&h . . 1452 

MubArak, his ^obted son 1399 deposed and seeks refuge 

Shamsu-d-Dtn — IbrAhtm ShAh at Gaur .... 1479 

Sharqt . ’ . . . 1401 

It was just two centuries after the conquest of India by the 
Moslims thalt 'Khwdja-i-Jah^n, the Siibahddr or governor of the 
province in which Jaunpur^ is situated, assumed independence, 
and established a dynasty which maintained itself for nearly a 
century, from a.d. 1394 to about 1479, and though then 
reconquered by the sovereign of Delhi, still retained a sort of 
semi-independence till finally incorporated in the Mughal empire 
by the great Akbar. During this period Jaunpur was adorned 
by several large mosques, three of which still remain tolerably 
entire, and a considerable number of tombs, palaces and other 
buildings, besides a fort and bridge, all oi which are as remark- 
able specimens of their class of architecture as are to be found 
anywhere in India. 

Although so long after the time when, under ’AUu-d-Dtn 
and Tughlaq Sh^h, the architecture of the capital had assumed 
something like completeness,' it is curious to observe how 
imperfect the amalgamation was in the provinces at the time 
when the principal buildings at Jaunpur were erected. The 
principal parts of the mosque, such as the gateways, the great 
halls, and the western parts generally, are in a complete arcuate 
style. Wherever, indeed, wide openings and large internal 

‘ Jaunpur is about 40 miles north-west plates from the drawings of the late 
from Benares. Its ari^itecture is treated Mmund W. Smith, of the Archseological 
in detail in *The Sharqt Architecture Survey, 
of Jaunpur’ (18S9) illustrated 74 



Crap. IV. JAUNPUR. 

spaces were wanted, arches and domes and radiating vaults 
were employed, and there is little in those parts to distinraish 
this architecture from that of the capitals. But in the cloisters 
that surround the courts, and in the galleries in the interior, 
short square pillars are as generally employed, with bracket 
capitals, horizontal architraves, and roofs formed of flat slabs, as 
was invariably the case in Hindfl and Jaina temples. Instead 
of being fused together, as they afterwards became, the arcuate 
style of the Moslims stands here, though in juxtaposition, in 
such marked contrast to the trabeate style of the HindOs, that 
some authors have been led to suppose that the pillared parts 
belonged to ancient Jaina or Buddhist monuments, which had 
been appropriated by the Muhammadans and converted to their 
purposes.^ The truth of the matter appears to be, that the 
greater part of the Muhammadans in the province at the time 
the mosques were built were Hindis converted to that religion, 
and who still clung to their native fo'rms when these did not 
clash with their new faith ; and the masons were almost 
certainly those whose traditions and whose taste inclined them 
much more to the old trabeate forms than to the newly- 
introduced arched style. 

As we shall presently see at Gaur, on the one hand, the 
arched style prevailed from the first, because the builders had 
no other material than brick, and large openings were then 
impossible without arches. At Ahmad&b&d, on the other hand, 
in an essentially Jaina country, and where stone was abundant, 
the pillared forms were not only as commonly employed as at 
Jaunpur, but were used for so long a time, that before the 
country was absorbed in the Mughal empire, the amalgamation 
between the trabeate and arcuate forms was complete. 

The oldest mosque at Jaunpur is that of Ibrihtm N&ib 
B&rbak the general of Ftruz Sh&h Tughlaq, in the fort, which 
we learn from an inscription on it, was completed in A.D. 1377.* 
It is not large — externally 130 ft. north and south — and consists 
of a central block of masonry, with a large archway, of the 
usual style of the Muhammadan architecture of the period, and 
five openings between pillars on either hand. The front row of 
these pillars is double, they are of various designs, the outer 

^ The first to suggest this was the at the time they were required for the 
Baron Hiigel, and the idea was taken places they now occupy, 
up by the late Mr Horne and Rev. M. * Mr Blochmann read the date 778 
A. Skerring. There may have been A. ii. (* Proceedings of the Asiatic Society 
some Jaina or Hindu buildings at of Bengal,* 1875, p. 14), Khairu-d-dln in 
Jaunpur of the 13th or 14th centuries his * History of Jaunpur,’ translated by 
that were utilised by the Muham- F. Pogson (p. 41) read this date as 790 
madans, but nine-tenths at least of the a.h, or 1396 a.d. 
pillars in these mosques were made 



»i4 INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 
pillars being square and the inner round, and richly sculptured, 






Chap. IV. JAUNPUR. 335 

or in the neighbourhood, before the Moslim occupation, but they 
seem to have exhausted the stock, as scarcely any other such 
are found in the mosques built subsequently.^ 

There are three great mosques still standing in the city ; of 
these the grandest is the J&mi’ Masjid (Woodcuts Nos. 383, 384), 
which was commenced by Shih Ibr&htm, A.D. 1438, but not 
completed till the reign of Husain Sh&h AD. 1452-14^8. It 
stands on a platform raised from 16 to 20 ft. above the ground 
level and consists of a courtyard 217 ft. 4 in. by 21 1 ft. 6 in., on 
the western side of which is situated the range of buildings 
forming the mosque, the central area covered by a dome 39 ft. 
8 in. in diameter, in front of which stands a gate pyramid or 
propylon^ of almost Egyptian mass and outline, rising to the 
height of 86 ft. This gate pyramid by its elevation supplied 
the place of a minaret, which is a feature as little known at 
Jaunpur, as it was, at the same age, in the capital city of Delhi. 
On each side of the dome is a compartment, 44 ft. 7 in. by 25 ft. 
4 in., divided into two storeys by a stone floor supported oh 
pillars ; and beyond this, on each side, is an apartment 39 ft. 7 in. 
by 49 ft. 3 in., covered by a bold pointed vault with ribs, so con- 
structed that its upper surface forms the external roof of the 
building, which in Gothic vaults is scarcely ever the case. Each 
compartment has three mihribs in the back wall, that is fifteen 
on the ground floor, with two in each of the upper rooms. 
The three sides of the courtyard were surrounded by double 
colonnades, two storeys in height internally, but with three on 
the exterior, the floor of the courtyard being raised to the 
height of the lower storey. On each face was a handsome 
gateway ; the southern one is represented in Woodcut No. 384, 
which gives a fair idea of the style. The greater part of the 
eastern side of the court with the entrance on that side and 
the upper storeys of the other cloisters, are said to have been 
destroyed by Sultfln Sikandar Lodi in his displeasure at the 
ingratitude of Husain, 1499-1516; though there is also a story 
of their being taken down at a very much later date. 

The smallest of the mosques in the city is the LSI Darw&za 
or Red Gate, which stands to the north-west of the city.* It is 
in the same style as the others ; and its propylon — represented 
in Woodcut No. 385 — displays not only the bold massiveness 
with which these mosques were erected, but shows also that 
strange admixture of HindQ and Muhammadan architecture 


^ A view of this mosque will be found 
in Kittoe’s ^Indian Architecture, ’plate 2, 
and a plan in Cunningham's ' ArchsEo- 
logical Survey Reports,’ vqI. xi. plate 31. 

^ It is partially seen in Woodcut 


No. 384; but for plans, elevations, 
sections, and details, see * Sharq! Archi- 
tecture of Jaunpur,* pages 52-63, and 
plates 43-73- 

* Ibid, pp. 43-51, and plates 26-40. 



aa6 INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 

which pervaded the style during the whole period of its con- 
tinuance. The Masjid measures i68 ft. 6 in. in length inside 
by 35 ft. 4 in. from front to back, whilst the court is about 
132J ft. from east to west, by 130J ft. from north to south, 
surrounded by corridors about I7i ft- wide on the sides, and 



385. LAI Darw&za Mosque, Jaunpur. (From a Drawing by the Author.) 


16 ft. at the east end. The propylon is 45 ft. wide over all 
at the base and 49 ft. high. 

Of all the mosques remaining at Jaunpur, the Atala Masjid, 
completed in 1408, is the most ornate and the most beautiful. 
The colonnades surrounding its court are five aisles in depth, the 
outer pillars, as well as those next the court, being double 
square pillars. The four intermediate rows are single square 
pillars, supporting a flat roof of slabs, arranged as in HindO 
temples. It is also two storeys in height, the lower storey 


Chap. IV. JAUNPUR. 2*7 

being occupied by three inner aisles belonging to the court, 
the fourth forming a series of cells opening outwardly, with 
a verandah supported by the outer row of pillars. All this 
is so like a HindQ arrangement that one might almost at 
first sight be tempted, like Baron Hiigel, to fancy it was 
originally a Buddhist monastery. He failed to remark, how- 
ever, that both here and in the J&mi* Masjid the cells open 
outwardly, and in the latter are below the level of the courtyard of 
the mosque — an arrangement common enough in Muhammadan, 
but never found in Buddhist, buildings. Its gateways, however, 
which are the principal ornaments of the outer court, are purely 
Saracenic, and the western face is adorned by three propylons 
— the central one 73 ft. 6 in. high by 64 ft. 6 in. wide at the 
base, and two smaller, each 31 ft 3 in. high and 23 ft. 6 in. wide, 
— similar to that represented in the last woodcut, but richer and 
more beautiful, while its interior domes and roofs are superior 
to any other specimen of Muhammadan art I am acquainted 
with of so early an age. They are, too, perhaps, more striking 
here, because, though in juxtaposition with the quasi-Hinduism 
of the court, they exhibit the arched style of the Saracenic 
architects in as great a degree of completeness as it exhibited 
at any subsequent period.^ 

The other buildings hardly require particular mention, 
though, as transition specimens between the two styles, these 
Jaunpur examples possess a simplicity and grandeur not often 
met with in this style. An appearance of strength, moreover, is 
imparted to them by their sloping walls, which is foreign to our 
general conception of Saracenic art, though at Tughlaq&b&d and 
elsewhere it is carried even further than at Jaunpur. Among the 
Afghans of India the expression of strength is as characteristic of 
the style as massiveness is of that of the Normans in England. 
In India it is found conjoined with a degree of refinement 
seldom met with elsewhere, and totally free from the coarse- 
ness which in other countries usually besets vigour and boldness 
of design. 

The pei^pliarities of this style are by no means confined 
to the capital; they prevail at Gh&zipur, and as far north as 
Kanauj, while at Benares the examples are frequent. In the 
suburbs of that city, at a place called the Bakarlyi Kund,^ 
there is a group of tombs, as mentioned above, and other build- 

^ * Sharqt Architecture uf Jaunpur/ have deserved a passing remark. Any 
pp. 3 et seqq, and plates 29 to 40. A few one familiar with the style would 
of the pillars are from llindCi temples. have assigned them a date— a. D. 1450, 

^ If the buildings of the Bakarfy^ or ih jreabouts —and would hardly have 
Kund had been found within 20 miles troubled himself to enquire who built 
of Ahn.ad^bSd where there are do7«*ns them, they are .so like all others of tUe 
exactly like them they would hardly same age. 



238 INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 

ings belonging to the Moslims, which are singularly pleasing 
specimens ' of the Jaunpur style, and certainly belong to tire 
same age as those just described. 

The kingdom of Jaunpur is also rich in little tombs and 
shrines in which the Moslims have used up HindA and Jaina 
pillars, merely rearranging them after their own fashion. These, 
of course, will not bear criticism as architectural designs, but 
there is always something so indescribably picturesque about 
them as fairly to extort admiration. The principal example 
of this compound style is a mosque at Kanauj known popularly 
as“Sit4-ki Rasot” “SttA’s Kitchen.” It seems to be a Jaina 
temple, rearranged as a mosque, in the manner described at 
pp. 68, 69, It measures externally 1 3 3 ft. by 1 20 ft. The mosque 
itself has four rows of fifteen columns each, and three domes. 
The cloisters surrounding the courts are only two rows in depth, 
and had originally sixty-eight pillars, smaller than those of 
the mosque. Externally it has no great beauty, but its pillared 
court is very picturesque and pleasing. According to an in- 
scription over its principal gateway, its conversion was effected 
by IbrAhtm ShAh of Jaunpur, a.d. 1406.^ 

At a later age, and even after it had lost its independence, 
several important buildings were erected :n the capital and in 
other towns of the kingdom in the style of the day ; but these 
are perhaps scarcely of sufficient importance to require notice 
in such a work as the present. 

^ General Cunningham’s * Reports,’ I ing the court on three sides had Jbeen 
vol. i. p. 287. From this I learn tliat removed since I saw them in 1836. 
shortly before 1857 the pillars surround- | 



CHAPTER V. 


gujarAt. 

CONTENTS. 

Jami’ Masjid and other Mosques at Ahmadibid — Tombs and Mosques 
at Sarkhej and Batvv^ — Buildings in the Provinces. 


CHRONOLOGY. 


Muzaffar Shah, a Rajput, 
appointed Viceroy A.n. 1391 

Ahmad Sh&h, his grandson, 
founds Ahniaddb&d . 1411 

Muhammad Shih the Merciful 1441 

Qutbu’d-Dln Sh&h ; war with 
R&nE Kumbha . . . 1454 


Mahmiid Shah Begarah . A.D. 1459 
Muzaflfar Sh 4 h II. . 15 1 1 

Bah&dur Shih murdered by the 
Portuguese . 1536 

Muzaffar Shdh III. . 1561 

Gujar&t becomes a province of 
Akbar’s kingdom . 1572 


Of the various forms which the Saracenic architecture assumed 
in India, that of Ahmadabad may probably be considered as 
the most elegant, as it certainly is the most characteristic of all. 
No other form is so essentially Indian, and no one tells its tale 
with the same unmistakable distinctness. 

As mentioned above, the Muhammadans, in the ist century 
of the Hijra, made a brilliant attempt to conquer Sindh and 
Gujarat, and apparently succeeded ; but the country was so 
populous, and its civilisation so great, that the invaders were 
absorbed, and soon disappeared from the scene. 

Mahmfid of Ghazni next overran the province, but left no 
permanent mark ; and even after the fall of Delhi (A.D. 1 196) 
Gujarat maintained the struggle for independence for about a 
century longer, till 'Al^u-d-Dfn, in 1297, wrested the country 
from Kama WaghelA and appointed provincial governors. 
Muhammad Shah III. Tughlaq, in A.D. 1391, had appointed 
Muzaffar, a converted Rajput, of the Tak clan, to be his viceroy. 
This, however, was on the eve of the troubles caused by the 
invasion of Timurlang, and Muzaffar assumed independence 
in 1396, hvX, viiitato Gujarat remained as independent 

as before. 

The next two centuries — during which the Ahmad Sh^ht 
dynasty occupied the throne — were spent in continual wars and 



ajo 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


struggles with their refractory vassals and the neighbouring 
chiefs. On the whole, however, their power may be said to 
have been gradually on the increase till the death of Bahadur, 
A.D. 1536, but they never wholly subdued the rebellious spirit of 
their subjects, and certainly never converted the bulk of them 
to their faith. As a consequence of this, the principal buildings 
with which this chapter is concerned are to be found in the 
capital and its immediate proximity. Beyond that the Hindils 
followed their old faith and built temples as before ; though in 
such larger cities as Dholki, Cambay or Bharoch the Muham- 
madans, of course, possessed places of worship, some of them 
of considerable importance, and generally made up from pillars 
borrowed from HindA buildings. 

In Ahmad&b&d itself, however, the Hindii influence con- 
tinued to be felt throughout. Even the mosques are Hindii, or 
rather Jaina, in every detail ; only here and there an arch is 
inserted, not because it was wanted construc^'ively, but because 
it was a symbol of the faith, while in their tombs and palaces 
even this is generally wanting. The truth of the matter is, the 
Hindii kingdom of Gujar&t had been in a high state of civilisa- 
tion before its subjugation by the Muhammadans, and the 
remains of their temples at Sidhpur, PatSn, Modheri, and 
elsewhere testify to the building capacity ,of the race, and the 
Muhammadans had forced themselves upon this race. The 
Chaulukyas, however, conquered their conquerors, and forced 
them to adopt forms and ornaments which were superior to any 
the invaders knew or could have introduced. The result is a 
style which combines all the elegance and finish of Jaina or 
Chaulukyan art, with a certain largeness of conception which the 
Hindu never quite attained, but which is characteristic of the 
people who at this time were subjecting all India to their sway. 

The first seat of the Muhammadan power was Anhilwld, 
the old capital of the Gujarat kingdom, and which, at the time 
it fell into their power, must have been one of the most splendid 
cities of the East. Little now remains of all its magnificence. 
Ahmad, the second king, removed the seat of power to a town 
called K^r,n^vati, afterwards known as Ahmad^bSd, from the 
name of its second founder, and which, with characteristic 
activity, he set about adorning with splendid edifices. Of these 
the principal was the J4mi’ Masjid, which, though not remark- 
able for its size, is one of the most beautiful mosques in the 
East. Its arrangement will be understood from the next plan 
Woodcut No. 386). Its dimensions are 382 ft. by 258 ft. over 
all externally ; the mosque itself being 210 ft. by 95 ft., covering 
consequently about 20,cxx> sq. ft. Within the mosque itself are 
260 pillars, supporting fifteen domes arranged symmetrically. 



Chap. V. GUJARAT. *31 

the centre three alone being somewhat larger and considvably 
higher than the others. If the plan is compared with that of the 



387. Elevation of the Jftmt' Masjid. Scale 50 ft. to i in. 


temple at R 4 npur (Woodcut No. 288), which was being erected 
about the same time under Kumbha Rdnft, within 160 miles of 
Ahmad4b4d, it will afford a fair means of comparison between 



a$2 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


the Jaina and Muhammadan arrangements of that day. The 
form of the pillars and the details generally are practically the 
same in both buildings, the HindO being richer and more 
elaborate. In plan, the mosque looks monotonous as com- 
pared with the temple ; but this is redeemed, to some extent; by 
the different heights of the domes, as shown in the elevation 
(Woodcut No. 387), and by the elevation of each division being 
studiously varied. My own feeling is in favour of the poetry of 
the temple, but there is a sobriety about the plan of the mosque 
which, after all, may be in better taste. Both plans, it need 
hardly be remarked, are infinitely superior to the monotony of 
the southern halls of 1000 pillars. The latter are remarkable 
for their size and the amount of labour bestowed upon them ; 
but it requires more than this to constitute good architecture. 

The general character of the elevation will be understood 
from the Woodcut No. 387, but unfortunately its minarets are 
gone. When Forbes^ drew it, they were still standing, and 
were celebrated in Eastern story as the shaking minarets of 
Ahmad&b&d; an earthquake in A.D. 1819 shook them too much, 
but there are several others still standing in the city from which 
their form can easily be restored. 

The plan and lateral extension of the JAmi’ Masjid are 

exceptional. The usual 
form taken by the 
mosques atAhmadabSd 
was that of the RAnt 
Rupawanti or Queen’s 
Mosque in the Mfrzapur 
ward, and consists of 
three domes standing 
on twelve pillars each, 
with the central part so 
raised as to admit light 
to the interior (Wood- 
cuts 388, 389). The 
mode in which this was 
effected will be under- 
stood from the annexed 
diagram (Woodcut No. 
390). The pillars which 
support the central 
domes are twice as high as those of the side domes, and two 
rows of dwarf columns stand on the roof to make up the 



Plan of the Queen’b Mosque, Mir/apur. 
Scale so ft. to i in. 



EleAation of the Queen’s Mosque, Mfrzapur. 
Scale 50 ft. to 1 in. 


^ Sec plate in Forbes’ ‘Oriental Memoirs,* vol, iii. ch. xxx. ; or * Archxolqgical 
Survey of Western India,* vol. vii. p. 30. 


Chap. V. GUJARAT. *33 

height. In front of these internally is a solid balustrade, which 
is generally most richly ornamented by carving. Thus arranged, 
it will be perceived that the necessary amount of light is intro- 
duced, as in the drum of a Byzantine dome, but in a more artistic 
manner. The sun’s rays can never fall on the floor, or even so 
low as the head of any one standing there. The light is reflected 



390. Section of Diagram explanatory of the Mos^iues at AhmadAbdd, 


from the external roof into the dome, and perfect ventilation is 
obtained, with the most pleasing effect of illumination without 
glare. In order further to guard against the last dreaded con- 
tingency, in most of these mosques a screen of perforated stone- 
work was introduced between the outer dwarf columns. These 
screens .were frequently of the most exquisite beauty, and in 
consequence have very frequently been removed. 

There are three or four mosques at AhmadabSd, built on the 
same pattern as that last described, but as the style progressed 
it became more and more Indian. The arches in front were 
frequently omitted, and only a, screen of columns appeared, 
supported by two minarets, one at each angle. This system 
was carried to its greatest extent at Sarkhej, about 5 miles 
from the city. Muhammad Shdh, in A.D. 1446, commenced 
erecting a tomb (A on Woodcut No. 391)* here, 102 ft. square, 
in honour of Ahmad Ganj Bakhsh, the friend and .adviser of his 
father. The style of these buildings may be judged of from the 
woodcut (No. 392, page 235), representing the pavilion of sixteen 
pillars in front of this tomb (I in Woodcut No. 391). They are 
of the usual simple outline of the style — a tall, square base ; 

_ ' For a mciisuruil pliiii lo three limes this scale, see ' AtcluBological Survey of 
Western India,’ vol. vii. pluie 56. 



334 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. BOOB VIE, 




Chap. V. GUJARAT. 335 

the shafts square, and with no ornament except a counteraink* 
ing on the angles, and crowned with a moderately projecting 
bracket-capital. The building is roofed with nine small domes. 



392. Pavilion in front of Tomb at Sarkhej. 


insignificant in themselves, but both internally and externally 
forming as pleasing a mode of roofing as ever was applied to 
such a small detached building of this class. The mosque (D), 
141 ft. by 65 ft. inside, was completed in A.D. 1451, and Mahmfid 
Begarah added afterwards a tomb for himself (B), 74 ft. square, 
and one for his wife K^jabai (C). With their accompanying 
palaces and tombs these make up one of the most important 
groups in the neighbourhood. The whole are constructed with- 
out a single arch; all the pillars have the usual bracket capitals 
of the Hindus, and all the domes are on the horizontal principle. 
In the large tomb an attempt has been made to get a larger 
dome than the usual octagonal arrangement would admit of, by 
placing it on twelve pillars, but not quite successfully. The 
duodecagon does not accord with the substructure, and either 
wider spaces ought to have been introduced or a polygon of 
a greater number of sides employed. The mosque is the 
perfection of elegant simplicity, and is an improvement on 
the plan of the Jami* Masjid. There are five domes in a line. 


236 INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 

as there, but they are placed nearer to one another, and though 
of greater diameter the width of the whole is less, and they 
are only two ranges in depth. Except the Moti Masjid at Agra, 
to be described hereafter, there is no mosque in India more 
remarkable for simple elegance than this. 

Besides these larger mosques there are several smaller ones 
of great beauty, of which two — those of Muh^fiz Khdn and the 

Rdni Stpri — are pre-eminent. The 
end elevation of the first, built in 
1492, is by no means happy, but its 
details are exquisite and it retains 
its minarets, which is too seldom 
the case.^ As will be seen from the 
woodcut, as well as from those of 
the Jfimi and Queen’s Mosques 
(Nos. 387 and 389), the lower part 
of the minarets is of pure Hindu 
architecture ; all the bases at 
Ahmadabad are neither more or 
less than the perpendicular parts 
of the basement of Hindu or Jaina 
temples elongated. Every form 
and every detail^ may be found at 
Chandravati or Abu, except in one 
particular — on the sides of all 
Hindu temples are niches contain- 
ing images. This the Moslim could 
not tolerate, so he filled them with tracer}'. W e can follcnv 
the progress of the development of this form, from the first 
attempt in the Jami’ Masjid, through all its stages to the 
exquisite patterns of the Queen’s Mosque at Mirzapur. After a 
century's experience they produced forms which as architectural 
ornaments will, in their own class, stand comparison with any 
employed in any age or in any pari of the world ; and in doing 
this they invented a class of window-tracer}' in which they were 
also unrivalled. The specimen below (Woodcut No. 394), from 
a window in the desecrated mosque of Sidi Sayyid in the 
palace enclosure (the Bhadr) will conve}' an idea of its elaborate- 
ness and grace.^ It would be difficult to excel the skill with 



393. Mosque of MuhAfi/ KliAn. 
Scale 25 ft. tp 1 in. 


’ The iinials of all the early domes 
and miniirs in Gujan^t bore tlie pippal 
leaf ; but when this mosque was repaired 
by the public works about thirty years 
ago, the Turkish crescent was substituted. 
The Turks themselves onh* assumed the 
symbol at Constantinople, after its capture. 


and luudl\ hel'ne this mos(|ue was com 
plelcd. The details t)f this, beautiful 
maqid arc pretty uiily illustrated in 
‘Arclueological Surxey of Western India,' 
vol. vii. plates 97 to io4. 

2 Ibid vol. vii. p[). 41 ct and 

plaic'j 46 to 51. 



Chap. V. 


GUJARAT. 


237 


which the vegetable forms are conventionalised just to the 
extent required for the purpose. The equal spacing also of the 
subject by the three ordinaiy trees and four palms, takes it out 
of the category of direct imitation of nature, and renders it 
sufficiently structural for its situation ; but perhaps the greatest 
skill is shown in the even manner in which the pattern is spread 
over the whole surface. There are some exquisite specimens of 



394. Window in Sidi Sayyid’s Mosque at Ahmad&bftd. 
(From a Photograph by Colonel Biggs.) 


tracery in precious marbles at Agra and Delhi, but none quite 
equal to this. 

Above the roof of the mosques the minarets are alvrays 
round towers slightly tapering, as in the mosque of Muh&fiz 
Khan (Woodcut No. 393); relieved by galleries displaying great 
richness in the brackets which support them as well as in the 
balustrades which protect them. The tower always terminates 
in a conical top relieved by various disks. They are, so far 
as I know, the only minarets belonging to mosques which 
surpass those of Cairo in beauty of outline or richness of 
detail, excepting those of the Rftnt Slpart mosque, which we 
still more beautiful. Indeed, that mosque is the most exquisite 
gem at Ahmadabfid, both in plan and detail. It is without 




INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE Book VII. 


*38 

arches, and evety part is such as only a Hindll' queen could 
order, and only HindA artists could carve.^ 


Tombs. 


Knowing the style, it would not be difficult to predicate the 
.form of the tombs. The simplest would be that of Abfi Turtb — 
an octagonal dome supported on twelve pillars, and this extended 
on every side, but always remaining a square, and the entrances 
being in the centre of the faces (Woodcut No. 395). The differ- 
ence between this and the Jaina arrangement is that the latter is 
diagonal (Woodcut No. 179, vol. i.), while these are square. The 


a" ■ ■“ 




395 > 


■■U- 

Tomb of Mir Abft Tun\b. 
Scale 50 ft. to I in. 




396. Plan and Elevation ol Tomb of 
Sawid 'UsmAn. Scale 50 ft. 10 i in. 


superiority pf the Hindd mode 
is apparent at a glance. Not, 
it is true, in so small an arrange- 
ment as that last quoted, but in 
the tombs at Sarkhej (Wood- 
cut No. 391), the effect is so 
monotonous as almost to become 
unpleasing. With the Jains 
this never is the case, however 
numerous the pillars may be. 

Besides the monotony of the square plan, it was felt at 
Sarkhej — as already pointed out — that the octagonal dome 
fitted awkwardly on to its supports. This was remedied, to a 
great extent, in the tomb of Sayyid ’Usmcln, built in A.D. 1460 
by Mahmfid Begarah. In this instance the base of the dome 
is a dodecagon, and a very considerable amount of variety is 
obtained by grouping the pillars in twos and fours, and by the 
different spacing (Woodcut No. 396). In elevation the dome 
looks heavy for the substructure, but not so in perspective; 


by vii. and viii. of the ‘ Arclueologicat Survey 

convqr «n impression of (he beauty of of Western India,’ and the photographs 
these nu>w]ues, the reader is referrra to in Fergusson and Hope’s * Architecture 
the drawings and photograpits in rols. of Ahmcdaltad,’ etc.'(t866). 



Chap. V. GUJARAT: TOMBS. 339 

and when the screens were added to eitclose the central sqvare, 
it was altogether the most successful sepulchral design carried 
out in the pillared style at Ahmad&b&d. 

^ Towards the end of their career, the architects of Ahmad&bAd 
evinced a strong tendency to revert to the arched forms 
generally used by their brethren in other countries. For 
Sayyid Mub&rak, one of MahmOd B^arah’s ministers, a tomb 
was built in 1484, near Mahmdd&b&d, which is wholly in the 
arched style, and remains one of the most splendid sepulchres 
in India.^ He aljso erected at Batwft, near Ahmad&b&d, k tomb 
over the grave of a saint, which is in every respect in the same 
style. So little, however, were the builders accustomed to 
arched forms, that, though the plan is judiciously disposed by 
placing smaller arches outside the larger, so as to aW them, 
still all those of the outer range have either fallen down, or, as 
has been suggested, were never erected, and the whole is very 
much crippl^, while the tomb without arches, that stands within 
a few yards of it, remains entire. The scale of the two, however 
(Plan, No. 398), reveals the secret of the preference accorded 
to the arch as a constructive expedient The larger piers, the 
wider spacing, the whole dimensions, were on a grander scale 
than could be attained with beams only, as the Hindfis used 
them. As the Greeks and Romans employed these features, 
any dimensions that were feasible with arches could be attained 
by pillars ; but the Hindfis worked to a smaller modulus, and 
do not seem to have known how to increase it It must, how- 
ever, be remarked that they generally used pillars only in 
courts, where there was nothing to compare them with but. the 
spectator’s own height ; and there the forms employed by them 
were large’enough. It was only when the Moslims came to use 
them externally, and in conjunction with arches and other larger 
features, that their diminutive scale became apparent. 

It is perhaps the evidence of a declining age to find size 
becoming the principal aim. But it is certainly one great and 
important ingredient in architectural design, and so thought 
the later architects of Ahmadkbkd. In their later mosques 
and buildings they attsuned greater dimensions, but it was at the 
ex^nse of ail that renders their earlier style so beautiful and 
so interesting. 

Besides the buildings of the classes above enumerated, there 
ate several smaller objects of art at Ahmadib&d which are of 
extraordinary beauty.. Among these are Mveral baoUs, wdvs, 
or deep vrells, with broad flights of steps leading down to them, 
and ornamented with pillars and galleries to as great an extent 


* Deicribed faither on, p. 244, WoodcaU Nos. 400 and 401, 



240 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


as some of the largest buildings above ground. It requires a 
personal experience of the grateful coolness of a subterranean 



397. Tomb of Qutbu -1 ‘Alam, BatwA. Scale 50 ft. to i in. 



398. Plans of Tombs of QiAbu-1 'Alam and his Son at BatwA. 
Scale about 50 ft. to z in. 


apartment in a hot dimate to appreciate such a class of 
buildings, and in the rainy West we hardly know how valuable 
water may become.^ 


^ For an illustrated account of some India,’ vol. viii. pp. 1-6 and zo-14 ; at 

of the Wdvs at or near AhmadAbAd, MahmudSbad, vol. vi. pp. 46, 47 ; and in 

‘Archteological Survey of Western North Gujai At, vol. ix. pp. 37L and iiaf. 




* 4 * 


Chap. V. GUJARAT: PROVINCIAL BUILDINGS. 

Another object of architectural beauty is found in the inflow 
and outflow sluices of the great tanks which abound ever3nvbere 
around the city. Nowhere did the inhabitants of Ahmad&bid 
show how essentially they were an architectural people, as in 
these utilitarian works. It was a necessity of their nature that 
every object should be made ornamental, and their success was 
as great in these as in their mosques or palaces. 

Buildings in the Provinces. 

In addition to the numerous edifices that adorn the capital, 
there are, as hinted above, several in the provincial capitals 
that are well worthy of notice. Among these the Jflmi’ Masjid 
at Cambay or Kambhelt, is one of the most splendid. It was 
erected in A.D. 1325, in the time of Muhammad IL ibn Tughlaq, 
and is only inferior to that of the capital in size. It measures 
over all 200 ft. by 210 ft., and its internal court 120 ft. by 135 ft. 
Except being somewhat smaller in scale, its plan and arrange- 
ments are almost identical with those of the Altamsh Mosque 
(Woodcuts Nos. 375, 376) at Ajmtr : but, when it is looked into, 
it would be difficult to conceive two buildings more essentially 
different than these two are. The screen of arches at Cambay, 
only three in number, are plain even to baldness, and low, in 
order to fit the dimensions of the Hindfi or Jaina pillars of the 
interior. These latter are all borrowed from desecrated temples, 
and in this instance certainly rearranged without much attention 
to congruity or architectural effect. Still the effect is picturesque, 
and the parts being employed for the purposes for which they 
were designed, there is no offensive incongruity anywhere. 

One of the most remarkable features in this mosque is the 
tomb, which its founder, ’Umar bin- Ahmad al K&zarflnl, in 1333, 
erected for himself. It stands in an enclosure about 49 ft. wide 
along the south end of the court, is wholly composed of Hindi! 
remains, and is two storeys in height, and was crowned with 
a dome 37 ft. in diameter. The parts, however — ^borrowed, 
apparently, from different buildings — were so badly fitted 
together that, after standing some three centuries, it fell in, 
and has since remained a ruin, singularly picturesque in form 
and exquisite in detail, but a monument of the folly of 
employing building materials for any purpose but that for 
which they were designed.^ 

There is another mosque at Bharoch, not unlike this one in 
design but smaller, being only 135 ft. over all north and south. 


^ For an account and drawing.s of the Cambay Mosque, etc., see * Arcbseological 
Survey of Western India,’ vol. vi. pp. 23-29 and plate 17 to 24a 



INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII 


448 

and it has— >now, at least — no courtyard ; but some of its details, 
borrowed from Hindd temples, are very beautiful.^ 

About 80 miles south-east from Ahmad&bftd is Ch&mp4ntr, 
which was subjugated by Mahmfid Begarah in 1484 and made 



399. Plan of the Jimi* Masjid at Ch&mp&ntr. Scale 50 ft. to x in. 


his new capital. Here he erected a J&mi’ Masjid, which was 
finished in 1508 and may fairly be regarded as architecturally 
the finest in Gujar&t It measures outside iy8 ft. from north to 
south by 216 ft from west to east The court in front had 


I ‘AfchteologiotlSiinr^ of Watem India,' voL vi. pp. vnttstqf. and platei 8>i4. 


Chap. V. GUJARAT: PROVINCIAL BUILDINGS. a43 

open arcades on three sides, now much ruined, and was entered 
from minor porches on the north and south with a larger and 
richly carved one on the east front. The mosque itself is 
in tolerable preservation and of large size, being 169 ft. 6 in. in 
length by 81 ft. inside the walls, and, like that at Ahmad&b&d, 
it has three rows of domes but quite differently arranged. 
There are, as will be seen from the plan (Woodcut No. 399), 
four domes in the front and back rows and in the middle only 
three, but disposed opposite the spaces separating the domes in 
the other rows. By this peculiar arrangement these eleven domes, 
each 20 ft. 6 in. in diameter, provide for seven mihr&bs or qiblas 
in the west wall. There are five arched entrances — the central 
one, as usual, being the loftiest and double the width of the 
others. On each side of it. rise the minSrs to a height of 100 ft., 
and the fa9ade wall, for a width of 5 1 ft., is raised to a height 
of nearly 50 ft. The central dome, with the area within the 
entrance, rises behind this to a height of three storeys with 
their two galleries. At the four corners of the mosque are 
turrets 50 ft. high, carved up to the root level, but above they 
are plain and have a rather 
clumsy appearance.* 

There are also two very 
beautiful mosques at Dholkfl, 
a city 23 miles south-west from 
Ahmadab&d. One of them, 
known as HiUl Khfln Qfizi’s, 
measures inside the walls 142 
ft from north to south, by 
147 ft., inclusive of the Masjid, 
which is 35 ft. deep. It has 
three arches in the central and 
higher part of the facade, and 
a smaller opening — for a per- 
forated stone window, in each 
wing. It was erected in 1333, 
and has two small turrets over 
the front, a fine marble mimbar 
or pulpit, a beautiful roof of 
panels taken from Hindu 
temples, and a remarkably fine 
porch and doorway at the entrance to the court.- The second 
is the Jami' Masjid, measuring 142 ft. from north, to south inside. 


H H ■ ■ ■ M ■ 



■ ■■■■■■I 



400. Plan of Tomb of Mubarak Sayyid, 
near Mahmud&b&d. Scale 50 ft. to i in. 


^ For an illustrated account of this plates 56-65. 
mosque, ste ‘ Archaeological Survey of • * Archaeological Survey of Western 
Western India,* vol. vi. pp. SQff. and India/vol. vi.pp. 3of.,andplatcs25to34. 



944 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


also with five domes— three in the middle of the facade, and one 
in each of the wings. It was erected about 1485, with minarets 
on each side the central arch of a pattern similar to those .at 
Ahmadilbid. A third mosque, erected in 1361 almost entirely of 
materials from HindO temples, is known as the Tink& Masjid.^ 
The most beautiful, however, of these provincial examples is 
the tomb at Mahmfid&b&d, of its class one of the most beautiful 
in India (Woodcuts Nos. 400 and. 401). It was erected in the 
reign of MahmQd Begarah, A.D. 1484, for Mub&rak Sayyid, 
one of his ministers. It was under the same sovereign that 
the tomb of Qutbu-1 ‘Alam was erected at Batw&, described 



40X. Tomb of Mub&rak Sayyid, near MahmftdAbftd. (From a Photograph.) 


above (Woodcut No. 398), and is said to have been designed 
by the same architect. This is, however, a far more successful 
example, and though small — ^it is only 94 ft. square, exclusive 
of the porch — there is a simplicity about its plan, a solidity 
and balance of parts in the design, which is not always found 
in these tombs, and has rarely, if ever, been surpassed in any 

* ' Ar^icol^gical Survey of Western India,’ vol. vi. pp. saf. and plates 38-14 ; 
pp. 3«f. and idates 50-54. 




*45 


Chap. V. GUJARAT: PROVINCIAL BUILDINGS, 

tomb in India. The details, too, are all elegant and appropriate, 
so that it only wants somewhat increased dimensions to rank 
among the very first of its class. Its constructive arrange- 
ments, too, are so perfect that no alterations in them would be 
required, if the scale had been very much increased. 

The tomb itself is surrounded by a screen of perforated 
stone-work of the very finest tracery, and with its double 
verandah aids in giving the sepulchral chamber that seclusion 
and repose so indispensable in a mausoleum.' 


^ ‘ ArchxolGgical Survey of Western 
India/ vol. vi. pp. 45f. and plates i, 
71 to 75. For a fuller account of the 
Muhammadan architecture of Gujarat 


with numerous drawings and photographs, 
vols. vi. to ix. of the same Western India 
Survey may be consulted. 



CHAPTER VI. 


MALWA. 

CONTENTS. 

Dhir — The Great Mosque at MandQ — The Palaces. 


CHRONOLOGY. 


Sultiln Dil^war Ghdr! . . a.d. 1401 

Sttlt&n HiUhang Ghdrt . ,, 1405 

Mahammad Ghaznt Kh&n ,, 1434 

Mahmild Sh^h I. Khaljt, 
cotemp.. lUn& Kumbha of 

Chitor . . . „ 1436 


Sultdn Gbiy^s Sh<lh Khaljt . A.D. 1475 
Sultin N^sir Sh^h . 1500 

‘SulUn MahmAd II. ,, 1510 

Mdlwfi incorporated with 
Gujar&t . . . . „ 1530 

annexed by Akbar . „ 1569 


The Ghdrt dynasty of Mandd attained independence about the 
same time a^'the Sharqts of Jaunpur, — SultAn Dildvvar, who 
governed the province of MdhvA from a.d 1387, having assumed 
the title of ShAh in a.d. 1401. It is, however, to his successor 
Hfishang, that MAndd owes its greatness and all the finest of 
its buildings. The state continued to prosper as one of the 
independent Moslim principalities till A.D. 1530, when it was 
incorporated with GujarAt, and was finally annexed to Akbar’s 
dominion in a.d. 1 569. 

The original capital of the state was DhAr, an old HindA 
city, about 24 miles northward of MandA, to which the seat of 
government was transferred after it became independent. 
Though an old and venerated city of the HindAs, DhAr contains 
no evidence of its former greatness, except two mosques erected 
wholly of Hind A remains. The principal of these, the JAmi’ 
Masjid, has a courtyard measuring 102 ft. north and south, by 
131 ft. in the other direction. The mosque itself is 1 19 ft. by 40 
ft. 6 in., and its roof is supported by sixty-four pillars of HindA 
architecture, 12 ft. 6 in. in height, and all of them more or less 
richly carved, and the three domes that adorn it are also of 
purely HindA form. The court is surrounded by an arcade 
containing forty-four columns, 10 ft. in height, but equally rich in 
carving. There is here no screen of arches, as at the Qutb or at 
Ajmir. Internally nothing is visible but Hindu pillars, and, 



Chap. VI. 


MALWA— MANDU. 


347 


except for their disposition and the prayer-niches that adorn the 
western wall, it might be taken for a Hindi! building. In this 
instance, however, there seems no doubt that there is nothing 
in situ. The pillars have been brought from desecrated temples 
in the town, and arranged here by the Muhammadans as we now 
find them, probably tefore the transference of the capital to 
MandO. 

The other mosque is similar to this one, and only slightly 
smaller. It has long, however, ceased to be used as a place of 
prayer, and is sadly out of repair. It is called the L&t Masjid, 
from an iron pillar which lay half-buried in front of its gateway. 
This is sometimes supposed to have been a jayastambha or 
pillar of victory, like that at the Qutb ; but this can hardly be 
the case. If it were intended for an ornamental purpose, it 
would have been either round or octagonal, and had some orna- 
mental form. As it is, it is broken into three pieces, the longest 
measuring 24 ft. 3 in., the end being about 1 1 in. square, but 
above 2 ft. from it, is aix>ut lof in. square ; the second section is 
II ft. 7 in. long, about three-fourths of which is square and the 
remainder octagonal ; and the third piece is of 7 ft. 6 in. and 
octagonal with the exception of a circular collar at the end.> 
My impression Is, that it was used for some useful constructive 
purpose, like those which supported the false roof in the Sun- 
temple at Kandrak (ants, page 107). There are some holes into it, 
which might tend to make this view of its origin probable. But, 
be this as it may, it is another curious proof of the employment 
of large masses of iron by the Hindfis at a time when they were 
supposed to be incapable of any such mechanical exertion. Its 
date is probably that of the pillars of the mosques where it is 
found, and from their style they probably belong to the loth or 
I ith century. 

The site on which the city of MandA is placed is one of the 
noblest occupied by any capital in India. It is an extensive 
plateau, detached from the mainland of M&lw& by a deep ravine 
about 3(X> to 400 yards across, where narrowest, and nowhere 
less than 200 ft. in depth. This is crossed by a noble causeway, 
defended by three gateways, and flanked by tombs on either 
hand. The plateau is surrounded by walls erected on the brink 
of the cliff— it is said 28 miles in extent. This, however, conveys 
a very erroneous idea of the size of the place, unless qualified by 
the information that the walls follow the sinuosities of the ravines 
wherever they occur, and many of these cut into the hill a mile 
or two, and are only half a mile across. The plateau may be 


‘ H. Consens in ‘ .Archeological Surrey .Annual Report, 1902-1903,' pp. 20511. 



INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 

4 or 5 miles east and west, and 3 miles north and south, 
most pleasingly diversified in surface, abounding in water, 
and fertile in the highest degree, as is too plainly evidenced 
by the rank vegetation, which was tearing the buildings of the 
city to pieces or obscuring them so that, till quite lately, they 
could hardly be seen. 

The Delhi gate on the north of the fortifications by which 
they are entered, has been a fine lofty structure, though now 
much ruined: it also is purely Path&n in style, but unusually 
eluant in proportions and decoration. 

The finest building in the city is the J&mi’ Masjid, commenced 
by Hfishang Sh&h, the second icing, who reigned from A.D. 1405 
to A.D. 1434, but it was only finished by Mahmfid Sh&h I. in 1454. 
Though not very laig[e, it is so simple and grand in outline and 
details, that it ranks high among the monuments of its class. Its 
dimensions are externally 290 ft. from east to west, exclusive of 
the porch on the east — which projects about 55 ft. — by 271 ft. 
from north to south. 

Internally, the courtyard is almost an exact square of 

162 ft, and in other 
respects the four sides 
of the court are exactly 
similar, each being 
ornamented by 'eleven 
great archesof precisely 
the same dimensions 
and height, supported 
by piers or pillars, each 
10 ft high, of one single 
block of red sandstone. 
The only vs'iety at- 
tempted is, that the east 
side has two arcades 
in depth, the north and 
south three : while the 
west side, or that facing 
Mecca, has fiv'e, besides 
being ornamented by 
three great domes, each 
42 ft. in diameter. 

As will be seen on 
the plan (Woodcut 
No. 402), these large 
domes are supported 
each by twelve pillars. 
The pillars are all equally spaced, the architect having omitted. 



402. Sketch plan of Mosque at Mandd. 
Scale S14 ft. to X in. 



Chap. VI. 


MALWA— MANDU. 


249 


for the sake of uniformity, to widen the central avenues on 
the intersection of which the domes stand. It follows from 
this that the four sides of the octagon supporting the dome, 
which are parallel to the sides of the court, are shorter than 
the four diagonal sides. Internally, this produces a very 
awkward appearance ; but it could not have been avoided 
except by running into another difficulty — that of having 
oblong spaces at the intersections of the wider aisles with the 
narrower, to which the smaller domes must have been fitted. 
Perhaps, on the whole, the architect took the less inconvenient 
course of the two. 

The interior of the court is represented in Woodcut No. 403, 
and for simple grandeur and expression of power it may, perhaps, 



403. Counyard of Great Mosque at MandO. (From a Sketch by the Author.) 


be taken as one of the very best specimens now to be found in 
India. It was, however, fast falling to decay, and a few years 
ago considerable repairs were executed on it and others of the 
MandO monuments at the expense of the DhOr state. 

The tomb of the founder, which stands behind the mosque, 
though not remarkable for size, is a very grand specimen of 
the last resting-place of a stern old PathOn king. ' Both inter- 
nally and externally it is reveted with white marble, artistically, 
but not constructively, applied, and consequently was in many 
places peeling off. The light is admitted by the doorway and 



INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE, Book VII. 


•SO 

two small windows by the sides of it, and by three perforated 
marble screens on the north side, so that the interior is not more 
gloomy than seems suitable to its destination. 

On one side of the mosque is a splendid DharmasAla or 
hall, 230 ft long, supported by three* ranges of pillars, twenty- 
eight in each row. These are of a pattern purely HindA ; only 
on the capitals the kirttimukh or horned goi^on face, so frequent 
in Hindi! decoration, has been hewn into a group of leaves of 
the same outline ; and on the north side is a porch, of which 
the pillars and style are purely Hindi!. 

The palaces of Mandi! are, however, perhaps even more 
remarkable than its mosques. Of these the principal is called 
Jah&z Mahall or “water palace,” from its being situated between 
two great tanks — almost literally in the water, like a “ship.” 
It is a massive structure, the eastern fagade hieing about 360 
ft. long and 40 ft. in height, in the centre of which is the 
arched entrance, faced with marble, and still in fair preserva- 
tion ; over it is a projecting cornice supported on brackets, 
above which is a bracketed balcony under an oblong pavilion. 
In the front of the lower storey on each side are five arches 
under a deep overhanging comice, and over each end of the 
fagade is a domed pavilion. On one side is a ruined wing of 
the palace branching off from it; and on the opposite side 
were other apartments and a stair leading up to the roof. Seen 
from the west, where it overhangs the lake, this is altogether 
a striking building. Its mass and picturesque outline make 
it one of the most remarkable edifices of its date ; very unlike 
the refined elegance afterwards introduced by the Mughals, 
but well worthy of being the residence of an independent 
PathSn chief of a warrior state. 

. The principal apartment is a vaulted hall, some 24 ft. wide 
by twice that length, and 24 ft. in height. Banked by buttresses 
massive enough to support a vault four times its section. 
Across the end of the hall is a range of apartments three 
storeys in height, and the upper ones adorned with rude, bold, 
balconied windows. Beyond this is a long range of vaulted 
halls, standing in the water, which were apparently the living 
apartments of the palace. Like the rest of the palace they are 
bold, and massive to a degree seldom found in Indian edifices, 
and produce a corresponding effect. 

On the brink of the precipice overlooking the valley of 
the Narbadd is another palace, called that of B&z Bah&dur, 
of a lighter and more elegant character— built apparently by 
Nisiru-d-Dtn Khaljt in 1509, but even more ruinra than the 
northeiti palace — some portions of the courtyards 2nd the 
cupolas over the colonnades are almost the only parts that 



Chap. VI. 


MALWA—MANDU. 


251 


remain. On the hill above is what is known as Rfipamatfs 
Chhatri, still in fair preservation. 

North of the Jimi’ Masjid stands the Hindola Mahall or 
Palace, which, with its massive masonry, is in rather better 
preservation than the others. The sloping, buttressed walls, 
projecting balconies and deep-set windows of this fine building 
present an appearance of great strength ; and the great hall 
within, 88 ft. 6 in. long by 24 ft. wide and 38 ft. high, its roof 
supported on arches, was a splendid apartment. To the north 
of this were store-rooms below, and above the Zan&na apart- 
ments : and at some distance to the west are the large under- 
ground cisterns and tah-kkdnas, or hot-weather retreats of the 
Champd well or bault These indicate the care and taste 
bestowed on such appendages of a Muhammadan palace 500 
years ago. 

The Nahdr Jharokhd Palace is to the north of the Hindola 
Mahall, and also within the walled enclosure ; and outside is 
Dildwar Khdn Ghdrfs mosque, the oldest in Mandd (1405), 
constructed of materials taken from Hindd shrines. It has, 
however, a simplicity of structure about it characterising it as 
a typical Pathdn work. 

About 80 yards to the south of the Jahdz Mahall is the 
Tawilt Mahall, a three-storeyed building, with its rows of lofty 
Saracenic arches below deep stone eaves and heavy windowless 
upper storeys. It lies across a beautiful foreground of water 
and ruins. 

Scattered over the whole plateau are ruins of tombs and 
buildings of every class and so varied as almost to defy descrip- 
tion. In their solitude, in a vast uninhabited jungle, they 
convey* as vivid an impression of the ephemeral splendour of 
these Muhammadan dynasties as anything in India, and, if 
properly illustrated, would alone suffice to prove how wonderfully 
their builders had grasped the true elements of architectural 
design. 

Here, as elsewhere, the available materials have exercised 
a marked influence upon the architecture ; the prevalence of a 
red sandstone is emphasised in the piers of the Jfimi’ Masjid — 
more than 300 of them being each of a single block of this 
material ; and for more decorative purposes marble, both white 
and coloured, was freely used to revet the walls and piers. We 
have here a strictly arcuate style, without admixture of the 
general trabeate structural methods followed by the native 
Hindhs; and while at Jaunpur and Ahmaddb^d, at the same 
period, we find the strong influence of native methods copied 
in the. Muhammadan architecture, at Mandii the borrowing or 
imitating of such forms seems to have been suppressed, and 



* 5 * 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII, 


the builders clung steadily to the pointed arch style, without 
any attempt, however, at groining — so successfully employed 
at a later period by the Mughal architects.^ 


* 'History of Mandu, by a Bombay 
Subaltern ’ (Lieut. Blake), Bombay 
reprint, 1875 ; Capt. C. Harris, ' Ruins 
of Mandno.’ fob (1860I : ' Tournal of the 


Bombay Br. K. Asiatic Society,’ vol. xix. 
(1895), pp. 154-201 ; vol. xxi. (1902), 
pp. 378-391; ‘ Archreological Survey 
Annual Report, 1903- 1904,’ pp. 30-45. 



CHAPTER VII. 

BENGAL. 

CONTENTS. 

Bengali roofing — Qadam-i-Rasiil Mosque, Gaur — Sond, Adinah and Eklikhi 
Mosques, MMd^ — Min^r — Gateways. 


Capital — Gaur. 

It is not very easy to understand why the architects of MalwA 
should have adopted a style so essentially arcuate as that which 
we find in the capital, while their brethren, on either hand, at 
Jaunpur and Ahmaddb^d, clung so fondly to a trabeate form 
wherever they had an opportunity of employing it. The MandCi 
architects had the same initiation to the Hindu forms in the 
mosque at Dhar ; and there must have been innumerable Hindu 
and Jaina temples to furnish materials to a far greater extent 
than we find them utilised, but we neither find them borrowing 
nor imitating, but adhering steadily to the pointed-arch style, 
which is the essential characteristic of their art in foreign 
countries. It is easy to understand, on the other hand, why in 
Bengal the trabeate style never was in vogue. The country 
is practically without stone, or any suitable material for forming 
either pillars or beams. Having nothing but brick, it was 
almost of necessity that they employed arches everywhere, and 
in every building that had any pretensions to permanency. The 
Bengal style being, however, the only one wholly of brick in 
India Proper, has a local individuality of its own, which is 
curious and interesting, though, from the nature of the material, 
deficient in many of the higher qualities of art which 
characterise the buildings constructed with larger and better 
materials. Besides elaborating a pointed-arched brick style of 
their own, the Bengalis introduced a new form of roof, which 
has had a most important influence on both the Muhammadan 
and Hindu styles in more modern times. As already mentioned 
in describing the Chhatrt at Alwar (ante, p. 169), the Itengalis, 
taking advantage of the elasticity of the bambu, universally 



*54 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


employ in their dwellings a curvilinear form of roof, which has 
become so familiar to their eyes, that they consider it beautiful 
(Woodcut No. 404). It is so in fact when bambu and thatch 

are the materials employed, but when 
translated into stone or brick archi- 
tecture, its taste is more questionable. 
There is, however, so much that is 
conventional in architecture, and beauty 
depends to such an extent on associa- 
tion, that strangers are hardly fair judges 
in a case of this sort. Be this as it 
may, certain it is, at all events, that 
after being elaborated into a feature 
of permanent architecture in Bengal, 
this curvilinear form found its way in 
the 17th century to Delhi, and in the 
1 8th to LShor, and all the intermediate 
buiidings from, say A.D. 1650, betray its presence to a greater 
or less extent. 

It is a curious illustration, however, of how much there is 
in architecture that is conventional, and how far familiarity may 
render that beautiful which is not so abstractedly that, while 
to the European eye this form always remains unple^ing, to 
the native eye— Hindu or Muhamrriadan-^it is the most elegant 
of modern inventions.* 



404. 


Modern Curved Form of 
Roof. 


Even irrespective, however, of its local peculiarities, the 
architecture of Gaur, the Muhammadan capital of Bengal, 
deserves attention for its extent and the immense variety of 
detail which it displays. It was in A.D. 1193 that Qutbu-d- 
Dtn Aibak captured Delhi, and in the same year Muhammad 
Bakhty&r Khalji extended the Moslim conquests down the 
Ganges as far as Bengal. Immediately he took Nadiya he 
established himself, in 1 194, as governor at Lakhnaut! or Gaur, in 
which office he was afterwards confirmed by the Sultan. The 
successive governors ruled with almost independent authority, 
and in 1282 Nasiru-d-Din Bughra Khdn, a son of the emperor 
Ghiyasu-d-Dtn Balban, was appointed governor, and the office 
became hereditary in his family. In 1338 Fakhru-d-DIn 
Mub&rak rebelled and slew the governor Qadar Khan, and 
separate governors ruled in East and West Bengal. But, in 
1345, Shamsu-d-Din Ilyas assassinated the ruler of West Bengal, 


1 In thk respect it is something like dow head.s. Though detestable in them- 
the curvilinear |>ediment.'» which Roman .selves, yet we use and admire them 
and Italian architects enipIo}‘cd as win- because wc are accustomed to them. 


Chap. VII. 


BENGAL. 


ass 

and in 1352 defeated lkhtiy&ru*d-Dtn Gh&zi Shih of East 
Bengal. He thus became the founder of the Purblya dynasty, 
which ruled for about a century and a half, or till 1487, when the 
throne was usurp^ by Habshts and subsequently, in 1493, by 
*Al&u-d-Dtn Husain Sh&h. But in the reign of his son Mahmfld, 
Sher Khin, the Afghin ruler of Bih&r, invaded Bengal in 1537, 
and completely sacked Gaur, after which this once great and 
wealthy capital began to decay and its buildings became 
neglected. The state was absorbed into Akbar’s vast kingdom 
in A.D. 1576, under D&’ild Shiih bin Sulaimin. Though none 
of these rulers did anything that entitles them to a place in 
general history, they possessed one of the richest portions of 
India, and employed their wealth in adorning their capital with 
buildings, which, when in a state of repair, must have been 
gorgeous, even if not always in the best taste. The climate of 
Bengal is, however, singularly inimical to the preservation of 
architectural remains. If the roots of a tree of the fig kind 
once find a resting-place in any crevice of a building, its 
destruction is inevitable ; and even without this, the luxuriant 
growth of the jungle hides the building so completely, that it 
is sometimes difficult to discover it — always to explore it. Add 
to this that Gaur is singularly well suited to facilitate the 
removal of materials by water-carriage. During the summer 
inundation, boats can float up to any of the ruins, and after 
embarking stones or bricks, drop down the stream to any new 
capital that may be rising. It thus happens that Murshid&b&d, 
Mfildfl, Rangpur, and R&jmahal have ^en built almost entirely 
with its materials, whilst Hugly, and even Calcutta, are rich in 
spoils of the old capital of Bengal, while it has itself become 
only a mass of picturesque but almost indistinguishable ruins. 

The city of Gaur was a famous capital of the Hindfis long 
before it was taken possession of by the Muhammadans. The 
Sena and P&la dynasties of Bengal seem to have resided here, 
and no doubt adorned it with temples and edifices worthy 
of their fame and wealth. These, however, were probably 
principally in brick, though adorned with pillars and details in 
what used to be called, black marble, but seems to be an 
indurated potstone of very fine grain, and which takes a 
beautiful polish. Many fragments of Hindu art in this material 
are found among the ruins ; and if carefully examihed might 
enable us to restore the style. Its interest, however, principally 
lies in the influence it had on the Muhammadan style that 
succeeded it. It is neither like that of Delhi, nor Jaunpur, nor 
any other style, but one purely local, and not without consider- 
able merit in itself ; its principal characteristic being heavy 
short pillars of stone supporting pointed arches and vaults in 



as6 INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 

brick — whereas at Jaunpur, for instance, light pillars carried 
horizontal architraves and flat ceilings. 

The general character of the style will be seen in the 
example from a mosque called the Qadam-i-Rasfll at the south- 
east gate of the fort at Gaur, and is by no means devoid of 
architectural merit (Woodcut No. 405).^ The solidity of the 
supports go far to redeem the inherent weakness of brick archi- 




■ 


'V^;i 




\iSSlMk-p. 


limn 

. ^ 

. - 

*■ 


.I105. Qadam-l-RasCil Mosque, Gaur. (From a Photograph.) 

tecture, and by giving the arches a firm base to start from, 
prevents the smallness of their parts from injuring the general 
effect. The facade is relieved t>y horizontal mouldings and 
panels of moulded brick, whilst string-courses of the same 
extend its whole length. It also presents, though in a very 
subdued form, the curvilinear form of the roof, which is so 
characteristic of the style. 


* U was built by Nasrat Sh.'lh, a.ii. Mecca, bearing the supposed impression 
30, to contain a stone brought by bib of Muhammad’s foot — qctdatihi^rasAit 
.her Husain Shah (1493-1519) from which is revered by Moslims. 




Chap. VII. 


BENGAL. 


*57 


In Gaur itself, the Golden or Son& Masjid, called the 
B&rah Darw&za, or twelve-doored, is a very handsome mosque. 
The fagade is in stone, and covered with foliaged patterns 
in low-relief, borrowed evidently from the terra-cotta ornaments 
which were more frequently employed, and continued a favourite 
mode of adorning facades down to the time of the erection of 
the Kdntanagar temple illustrated above (Woodcut No. 354). 
In the interiors of the mosques the pillars have generally been 
removed, and the vaults consequently fallen in, so that it is not 
easy to judge of their effect, even if the jungle would admit 
of the whole area being grasped at once. Their general dis- 
position may be judged of, however, by the plan on next page 
(Woodcut No. 406) of the Adtnah mosque at Pandu&, which 
formed at the time it was erected the northern suburb of the 
capital. 

The Bflrah Soni Masjid, outside the fort to the north-east, 
is perhaps the finest memorial now left at Gaur. Built by 
Na.rrat Shflh in 1 526, it is 168 ft in length by ft outside, with 
walls 8 ft thick and faced inside and out with hornblende. 
It has eleven arched entrances in front, each 5 ft 1 1 in. wide, and 
14 ft. high. These enter the front corridor, the arches of which 
support the eleven domes of the roof. Beyond this is the 
masjid proper, of which the roof has all fallen; it had three longi- 
tudinal aisles, supported by twenty pillars, and there were eleven 
mihribs in the wall. At both sides of the doorways at the ends 
of the corridor, and at the back corners were polygonal minarets 
of brown basalt, six in all, but their heads are now ruined. From 
its massive solidity and size this is an imposing building ; indeed 
this characteristic of the Gaur architecture forms a striking 
contrast to the lighter arcades of much of the Saracenic style. 

From inscriptions upon it, it appears that the Adtnah masjid 
was erected by Sikandar Shah, one of the most illustrious of 
his race (A.D. 1358-1389), with the intention of being himself 
buried within its precincts, or in its immediate neighbourhood.' 
Its dimensions are considerable,' being nearly 507 ft. north 
and south, and 285 ft. east and west. In the centre it contains 
a courtyard nearly 400 ft. by 154 ft., surrounded on all sides by 
a thick wall of brick, divided by eighty-nine similar arched 
openings, only one of which, that in the centre of the west side 
facing Mecca, is wider and more dignified than the rest The 
roof in like manner was supported by some 260 pillars about 
2 ft. square, at the base and 10 ft 5 in. high — some of one block 
of black hornblende and others built similar in design to those 
represented in Woodcut No. 405. They are bold and pleasing in 


^ His ruined tomb is attached to the west wall near its north end. 



INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


design, but it must be confessed wanting in variety. These 
with the walls supported no less than 378 domes, all similar in 
design and construction. The only variation that is made is 
where a platform, called the BSdshSh*ka-Takht, the King's 


V ■ ■ ■ ■ 

V ■ ■ ■ ■ 

» • ■ ■ • *1 







■ ■•■•■•■■■■a 41 ^ ■ ■ iH| 


lUAmJLilAAiAiAAAilAAA 

Plan of Adinah Mosque, PanduS. Scale loo ft. to i in. 


Throne or Royal Gallery, divides a part of the building into two 
storeys. This is supported by twenty-one short pillars of much 
heavier form, and has others, monolithic, and of a more elegant 
style above. But the roof has fallen and very few of the 
other supporting pillars are intact. 



Chap. VII. 


BENGAL. 


259 


A design, such as that of the Adtnah mosque, would be 
appropriate for a caravanserai ; but in an edifice where expression 
and beauty were absolutely required it is far too monotonous. 
The same defect runs through the whole group ; and though 
their size and elegance of details, joined with the picturesque 
state of richly foliaged ruin in which they were long found, made 
them charming subjects for the pencil, they possess all the 
defects of design we remarked in the great halls of a thousand 
columns in the south of this country.^ It seems, indeed, almost 
as if here we had again got among the Tamil race, and that 
their peculiarities were reap^aring on the surface, though 
dressed in the garb of a foreign race. 

Two miles to the south-west of the Adtnah masjid is the 
Ekl^lkht mosque or tomb, for it is said to be the tomb of 
Ghiy4su-d-Dtn ’Az 4 m Shih (1390-1397), but there is no inscrip- 
tion to show this, and it may have been the work of Jal&lu-d-Dtn 
Muhammad Sh 4 h (1414-1443), who was a great builder.' It is 
80 ft. square and covered by one dome. Much of the materials 
have been taken from Hindd temples, the structure being built 
of hornblende slabs and 
brick, with much em-i 
bossed brick used in 
the decoration. The 
corner buttresses are 
richly carved, reminding 
one of the bases of 
minarets, but they had 
only a capstone above 
the level of the roof, the 
corners of which curve 
downwards on each face. 

Though much smaller, 
this was altogether a 
bolder and architectur- 
ally finer structure than 
the Adtnah mosque. 

One of the most inter- 
esting of the antiquities 
of the place is a min&r, 
standing just outside the 
fort to the east (Wood- 
cut No. 407). For two- 
thirds of the height it is a 
polygon of twelve sides ; 
above that circular, till it attains the height of 84 ft. The door 



* Antet vol. i. page 368, ef seqq. 


s6o INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 

is at some distance from the ground, and altogether it looks 
more like an Irish round - tower than any other estample 
known, though it is most improbable that there should be 
any connection between the two forms. Probably a platform 
about 15 ft. in height once surrounded the base, but if so, 
it has entirely disappeared. Inside, a spiral stair leads to 
the small chamber on the summit, once roofed by a dome. 
It is perhaps a pillar of victory — a Jaya-Stambha — such 
as the Qutb Min&r at Delhi, and those at Koil, Daulatib^ld, 
and elsewhere. There is said to have been an inscription 
on this monument which ascribed its erection to Saifu-d- 
D!n Firuz Sh&h II., who reigned in Gaur A.D. 1488-1490, and 
the character of the architecture fully bears out this adscrip- 
tion. The. native tradition is, that a saint, Ptr AsA,* lived, like 
Simon Stylites, on its summit ! 

Besides these, there are several of the gateways of Gaur 
which are of considerable magnificence. The finest is that 
called the D&khil or Sal4mt gateway, the north entrance into 
the fort, said to have been built by Ruknu-d-Dtn B&rbak Sh&h 
(1460-1474), which, though of brick, and adorned only with 
terra-cotta ornaments, is as grand an object of its class as is to 
be found anywhere. The gate of the citadel, and the southern 
gate of the city, are very noble examples of what can be done 
with bricks, and bricks only. The latter of these, known as 
the KotwaiJ DarwSza, is a handsome and imposing gateway 
leading from the; south side of the old city, and, except above, 
is in pretty good preservation. To the apex of the arch is 
31 ft. and the depth is 51 ft, and on the south it was provided 
with semicircular abutments on each side for the military 
guard.* 

It is not, however, in the dimensions of its buildings or the 
beauty of their details that the glory of Gaur resides; it is in the 
wonderful mass of ruins stretching along what was- once the high 
bank of the Ganges, for nearly twenty miles, from Pandud south- 
wards — mosques still in use, mixed with mounds covering ruins 
— ^tombs, temples, tanks and towers, scattered without order over 
an immense distance, and long half buried in a luxuriance of 
vegetation which only this part of India can exhibit. What 
looks poor, and may be in indifferent taste, drawn on paper and 
reducra to scale, may give an idea of splendour in decay when 


^ Probably a corruption of Firuz-Sh&h. 
• J. H. lUvenshaw’s ‘ Gaur, its Ruins 
and Insertions’ (4to, London, 1878); 
Montpolnery Martin’s * Eastern India,’ 
vol. u. pp. ^3*658, and vol, iii* pp, 67- 


80; Major Francklhvs ‘Journal of a Route 
from ^jmehal to Gaur in 1810’ (MS. 
in India OfAce) ; Cunningham, ‘Reports,’ 
vol. XV. pp. 39 * 94 , and plates 13-20. 



Chap. VII. 


BENGAL. 


s6t 


seen as it is, and in this respect there are none of the ancient 
capitals of India which produce a more striking, and at the same 
time a more profoundly melancholy, impression than these ruins 
of the old Afghin capital of Bengal.' 


* The clearance of undergrowth by the 
introduction of cultivation in 1879, and 
the attention of the Bengal Government 


to these remains since then have rendered 
them much more accessible. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

KULBARGA. 

CONTENTS. 

The Mosque at Kulbarga — Madrasa at Bidar — Tombs. 


CHRONOLOGY. 


'Al&u - d - Din Hasan GdngO, 
Bahmant, a servant in 
Muhammad Tughlaq’s court A. D. 1347 
Muhammad Shah I. Gti&zi . „ 1358 
MuiAhidShAh. .. . n 1375 

MahmAd ShAh I. (or Muhammad 


ShAhll.) . . . . 

TAju-d-D!n FirAz ShAh married 
daughter of’ 'DevarAya of 
Vijayanagar .... 
Ahmad Sh& I., capital Bidar 


f > 


it 


1378 

«397 

1422 


’AlAu‘d-Dtn Ahmad ShAh II. A.D. 1435 
Kaltm AllAh ShAh, last of the 

Bahmant dynasty . . . ,, 1525 


QAsim I., Bartd; founder of 

Bartd ShAh| dynasty of Bidar 1492 
’Alt Bartd SMht, assumed 

royalty . . . . „ 1542 

Amir Bartd ShAh, last of his 

race 1609 


The campaigns of ’Alau-d-Din and of Tughlaq Sh^h in the 
beginning of the 14th century extended the fame and fear of 
the Moslim power over the whole peninsula of India, as far as 
Cape Comorin and the Straits of Man&r. It was almost 
impossible, however, that a state in the semi-barbarous condition 
of the Afghans of that day could so organise a government as 
to rule &o extensive and varied an empire from one central 
point, anJ that as remote as Delhi. Tughlaq Sh^h felt this, 
and proposed to establish the capital at Daulat&b^d. If he had 
been able to accomplish this, the whole of the south might have 
been permanently conquered. As it was, the BallAla dynasty 
of Halebtd was destroyed in A.D. '1311,^ and that of Worangal 
crippled but not finally conquered till some time afterivards, 
while the rising power of Vijayanagar formed a barrier which 
shielded the southern states against Muhammadan encroach- 
ment for some centuries after that time ; and but for the estab- 
lishment of Muhammadan kingdoms independent of the central 


^ vol. i. p. 437. 



Chap. VIII. KULBARGA. 363 

power at Delhi, the Dekhan might have been lost to the 
Moslims, and the HindAs held their own for a long time, perhaps 
for ever, to the south of the Vindhya range. 

The first of those dynasties that successfully established 
its independence was that called the Bahmant, from its founder. 
Hasan Gftngfi, being the servant of a Br&hman in Mahmfld 
Tughiaq’s court, and owing his rise to his master, he adopted 
his name as a title in gratitude. He established himself at 
Kulbarga or Gulbarga,^ an ancient Hindi! city of the Dekhan in 
1347, and with his immediate successors the kingdom extended 
from Berir to the Krishna river, and from the Worangal kingdom 
on the east to the Arabian sea on the west, and not only held 
in check the Hindi! sovereigns of Worangal and Vijayanagar, 
but actually forced them to pay him tribute. This prosperous 
state of affairs lasted for nearly a century, when Ahmad Shflh I. 
(a.d. 1422 - 1435), for some reason not explained, in 1428 
transferred the seat of power to Btdar. Under *Aliu-d-Din 
Ahmad II. fresh conquests extended the kingdom over all the 
western Dekhan from Mysore to Gujar&t. After Muhammad II., 
they lingered on for about another century, latterly known as 
the Barid Sh&his, till they were absorbed in the great Mughal 
empire in A.D. 1609.^ Long before that, however, their place in 
the Dekhan had been taken by the Bij&pQr ’Adil Sh&hts, who 
established themselves there a.d. 1490. 

During the short supremacy of Kulbaiga as capital of the 
Dekhan (A.D. 1347-1428), it was adorned with several important 
buildings, among which was a mosque, one of the most remark- 
able of its class in India (Woodcuts Nos. 409, 410). Its 
dimensions are considerable, though not excessive : it measures 
216 ft. east and west, and 170 ft. north and south, and conse- 
quently covers 36,720 sq. ft. Its great peculiarity, however, is 
that, alone of all the great mosques in India, the whole of the 
area is covered over as in the great mosque at Cordova. 
Comparing it, for instance, with the mo.sque at Mandfi, which 
is the one in other respects most like it, it will be observed that 
the greater part of its area is occupied by a courtyard surrounded 
by arcades. At Kulbarga there is no court, the whole area of 
about 126 ft. by 100 ft. is roofed over by sixty-three small 
domes, and the light is admitted through the side walls, which 
are pierced with great arches for this purpose on all' sides except 
the west; where is the masjid proper, 45 ft. in depth (Woodcut 
No. 408). The central area of the mosque is covered by a dome 
40 ft. in diameter, raised on a clerestory, and the side areas by 

* Kulbarga U the form generally and * A veiv succinct account of the d3aiasty 
properly used, but in Haldar&b&d, the is given in the ' Numismatic Chronicle,' 
spelling Gulbaiga is favoured. 3rd Series, vol. i. pp. 91 rf seqq. 



*64 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


six small domes each, whilst on each end of the side corridors 
are domes of 25 ft. in width. 

Having only one example of the class, it is not easy to form 
an opinion which of the two systems of building is the better. 



408. Mosque at Kulbarga. (From a Plan by the Hon. Sir Arthur Gordon, 
now Lord Stanmore.) Scale 50 ft. to 1 in. 


There is a repose and a solemnity which is singularly suited to 
a place of prayer, in a courtyard enclosed by cloisters on all 
sides, and only pierced by two or three doors ; but, on the other 
hand, the heat and glare arising from reflection of the sun’s rays 
in these open courts is sometimes most painful in Such a climate 









Chap. VIII. 


KULBARGA. 


*6S 



Half elevation half section of the Mosque at Kulbarga. Seale 50 ft. to i in. 



4to. View of the Mosque at Kulbarga. (From a Photograph.) 

protection from the sun's rays to all worshippers, and every aisle 
being open at one or both ends, prevented anything like gloom, 





«66 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


and admitted of far freer ventilation than was attainable in the 
enclosed courts, while the requisite privacy could easily have 
been obtained by a low enclosing wall at some distance from 
the mosque itself. On the whole, my impression is that the 
Kulbai^ plan is the preferable one of the two, both for con* 
venience and for architectural effect, so much so indeed, that 
it is very difficult to understand why, when once tried, it was 
never afterwards repeated. Probably the cause of its being 
abandoned was the difficulty of draining so extensive a flat 
roof during 'the rains. Any settlement or any crack must have 
been fatal; yet this mosque stands in seemingly good repair, 
after four centuries of comparative neglect. Whichever way 
the question is decided, it must be admitted that this is one of 
the finest of the old mosques of India, at least among those 
which are built wholly of original materials — and in the arcuate 
style of Muhammadan art. Those at Delhi and Ajmtr are 
more interesting of course, but it is from adventitious circum- 
stances. This owes its greatness only to its own original merits 
of design.* 

Besides the mosque, there is in Kulbarga a b&zdr, 570 ft. 
long by 60 ft wide, over all, adorned by a range of sixty-one 
arches on either hand, supported by pillars of a quasi-Hindfl 
character, and with a block of buildings of a very ornamental 
character at' either end. I am not aware of anything of its class 
more striking in any part of India. The arcades that most 
resemble this are those that line the street called the Street of 
the Pilgrims, at Vijayanagar, which may be contemporary with 
this b&z&r. 

There are other buildings, especially one gigantic gateway, 
in the city of Kulbarga, in front of the shrine or Darg&h of Banda 
Naw&z, built about 1640 ; and in the east of the town are some 
very gmnd old tombs — of seven of the BahmanI kings — massive 
square domed structures, with sloping walls, and with some 
handsome stone tracery on the outer surfaces, but otherwise of 
little architectural merit; inside they are elaborately finished, 
but have been, and are still, used as Government offices and 
residences. 

After thc! seat of government was removed to Bldar, a little 
over sixty miles to the north-east of Kulbarga, by Ahmad 

' For the plan and section of this The mosime is now in a dilapidated 
mosque I am indebted to my friend the condition. In an attempt to repair it at 
Hon. Sir Arthur Gordon (now IsOrd one time, an old powder magazine close 
Stanmore). He made the plans himself, by was exploded and the work >K'as 
and most liberally placed them at my . stopped- But it has since been taken 
disposal. up afresh. 



Chap. VIII. 


BIDAR. 


367 


Sh^ I., A.D. 1422-1435, the new capital was adorned by edifices 
worthy of the g^atness of the dynasty, but which are now 
greatly ruined. Among these the most ms^ificeot appears to 
have been the madrasa or college erected by Khw&ja Mahmild 
G&w&n (or Gilant), the faithful but unfortunate minister of the 
tyrant Muhammad II. It was about 205 ft. by 180 ft., with lofty 
towers at the ends of the east face, and must have been a 
striking building, three storeys in height, with its towers — if not 
the whole facade — covered with enamelled tiles. It appears to 
have been finished two years before his death, in A.D. 1481, and 
in Ferishta’s time was one of the most complete and flourishing 
establishments of its class in India.* Unfortunately, when the 
place was besieged by Aurangztb in 1656, a quantity of 
gunpowder was stored in it and exploded, either accidentally 
or by design, so as to ruin one wing. Since then the building 
has been disused, but so far as can be judged from such 
imperfect information as is available, it must have been one of 
the most splendid buildings of its day. In the citadel the most 
entire structure, perhaps, 'is the mosque, which is 295 ft. in length 
by 77 ft. deep, with nineteen arched entrances in front, and inside 
eighty round piers, each .4^ ft. in diameter, which support the 
groins of the roof. In the middle, enclosing the mihrdbs and 
a pulpit of three steps, is an apartment 38 ft. square, which is 
carried up as an octagon a storey above the roof of the mosque, 
and covered by a large dome. Farts of the roof— which was 
covered by some eighty-four small domes — have fallen in. The 
ten tombs of Bahman! kings, about 5 miles north-east from 
the city, are of the like pattern and of considerable splendour, 
the largest being that of Ahmad Sh&h I., who died in 1435. 
They are not much ornamented, but are structurally good, and 
impressive by their massive proportions. 

The tombs, too, of the Bartd Sh&ht dynasty, which reigned 
in Btdar from A.D. 1492-1609, are of considerable splendour, and 
rival those of Golkonda in extent. 'The tomb of Am!r Itertd 
Sh&ht, the second of this dynasty (1504-1538), about half a mile 
to the west of the city, stands on a large solid platform, and is 
nearly 57 ft. square, with walls 9 ft. 8 in. thick, which rise to a 
height of 57 ft from the platform, and are crowned with a sort 
of honeysuckle border. The dome is about 37 ft. in height 
and is ornamented inside with belts of coloured tiles, and further 
decorated with interlaced Arabic sentences.* 

’ Brigg's translation of Ferishta, vol. Bidar, sec ‘ Arcbxological Survey of 
ii. p. 51a Western India,’ vol. iii. pp. 43*46, and 

* For farther inforniiilion respecting plates 28-33. 



CHAPTER IX. 
bitApCr. 

CONTENTS. 

The Jimi’ Ma^id — Tombs of Ibrihim and Mahmud — The Audience Hall — 
Mihtari Mahall — Golkonda Tombs — Tomb of Nawib Amir Kh&n, 
near Tatta. 


CHRONOLOGV. 

Yilsttf *Adil Sh&h . A. D. 1490 ’Alt *Adil Sh&h I. . A. D. 1557 

Ismael ;,AdU Sh&h . . ,^1510 Ibrahim ’Adil^Sh&h II 15S0 

Malld ’Adil Shah . 1534 Muhammad ’Adil Shah . . ,, 1626 

Ibrahim ’Adil Shah 1 1535 ’Alt Adil Shah II 1656 

As mentioned above, the Bahmant dynasty of Kulbarga main- 
tained the struggle against the Hindu principalities the 
south for nearly a century and a half, with very little assistance 
from either the central power at Delhi or their cognate states 
in the Dekhan. Before the end of the i Sth century, however, 
they began to feel that decay inherent in all Eastern dynasties ; 
and the Hindis might have recovered their original possessions, 
up to the Vindhya at least, but for the appearance of a new and 
more vigorous competitor in the field in the person of Yusuf 
'Adil Khdn, supposed to have been the son of Sultan Mur^ II. 
of Anatolia. He was thus a Turk of pure blood, and born in 
Constantinople, though his mother was forced to send him 
thence while he was still an infant. After a varied career he 
was purchased for, and found service in the body-guard of Amir 
BarTd at BTdar, and soon raised himself to such pre-eminence 
that on the defeat of Dastur Dinar, in 1501, he was enabled to 
proclaim his independence and establish himself as the founder 
of the 'Adil Sh^ht dynasty of Bij^pur. 

For the first fifty or sixty years after their accession, ^the 
struggle for existence was too severe to admit of the 'Adil 
ShAbts devoting much attention to architecture. The real 
building epoch of the city commences with 'Alt, a.d, 1557, 
and all the important buildings are crowded into the 100 



Chap. IX. BIJAPUR. 369 

years which elapsed between his accession and the wars with 
Aurangztb, which ended in the final destruction of the dynasty. 

During that period, however, their capital was adorned with 
a series of buildings as remarkable as those of any of the 
Muhammadan capitals of India, hardly excepting even Agra 
and Delhi, and showing a wonderful originality m design not 
surpassed by those of such capitals as Jaunpur or Ahmad&bftd, 
though differing from them in a most marked d^ree. 

It is not easy now to determine how far this mriginality 
arose from the European descent of the ’Adil Shfthls and their 
avowed hatred of everything that belonged to the HindOs, 
or whether it arose from any local circumstances, the value 
of which we can now hardly appreciate. The foreign origin 
of the ’Adil Shflht dynasty and their partiality for the Shiah 
form of Isl&m prevailing in Persia, rather than the Sunni, 
tc^ether with their ready employment of Persian officers, may 
probably have influenced their architecture, and led to that 
largeness and grandeur which characterised the Bijdpilr style. 

Earlier Muhammadan invaders, before the ’Adil Sh&hls 
— under Karlmu-d-DIn, about 1316— had built a mosque in the 
fort at BijipOr, constructed out of Hindfl remains. How far 
the pillars used there by them are tom from other buildings, 
we are not informed. It would appear, however, that it 
consists partly of the portico of a Hindi! temple; but this is 
not incompatible with the idea that other portions were removed 
from their original positions and re-adapted to their present 
purposes. Another mosque, known as Khw&ja Jahfln’s, dating 
f^rom about the end of the 15th century, resembles a HindO 
temple, and was evidently erected also from materials taken 
from earlier fanes. But as soon as the new dynasty had leisure 
to think really about the matter, they abandoned entirely all 
tendency to copy Hindfi forms or Hindu details, but set to work 
to carry out a pointed-arched, or domical style of their own, 
and did it with singular success.* 

The JSmi’ Masjid, which is one of the earlier regular 
buildings of the city, was commenced by ’All ’Adil Shih 
(a.d. 1557-1579), and though continued by his successors on 
the same plan, was never completely finished, the fourth side 


^ BijapCir has been singularly fortunate, 
not only in the extent, but in the mode 
in which it has been illustrated. A set 
of drawings— plans, elevations, and de- 
tails— were made by Mr A. Ciimming, 
C.E., under the simrintendence of Capt. 
Hart, Bombay Engineers, which, for 
beauty of drawing and accuracy of detail, 
are unsurpassed. These were reduced 


and published by me at the expense of 
the Government in 1859, 1.. a folio 
volume with seventy-four plates, and 
afterwards in 1866 at the ex^nse of the 
Committee for the Publication of the 
Antiquities of Western India, illustrated 
further by photographic views taken on 
the spot by Col. Biggs, R.A. 



INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


»7o 


of the courtyard with its great gateway not having been even 
commenced when the dynasty was overthrown. Even as it 
is, it is one of the finest mosques in India. 

As will be seen from the plan (Woodcut No. 41 1), it would 
have been, if completed, a rectangle of 331 ft. by 257 ft. The 



41 z. Plan of the Jdnii’ Masjid, Bijc\pAr. Scale zoo ft. to z in. 


mosque itself is perfect, and measures 257 ft. by 145 ft., and 
consequently covers about 37,cxx> sq. ft. It consequently is 
in itself just about equal to the mosque at Kulbarea; but 
thia is irrespective of the wings, which extend 186 ft. neyond, 
so that, if completed, it would have covered about '85,000 sq. ft. 



Chap. IX. BIJAPUR. 


371 


— more than the usual size of a mediaeval cathedral It M more 
remarkable, however, for the beauty of its details than eidier the 
arrangement or extent of its plan. Each of the squares into 
which it is divided is roofed by a dome of very beautiful form, 
but so flat (Woodcut No. 412) ais to be 
concealed externally in the thickness of 
the roof. Twelve of these squares are 
occupied in the centre by the great dome, 

57 ft in diameter in the circular part, but 
stauiding on a squaue measuring 70 ft 



each way. The dimensions of this dome 

were immensely exceeded afterwards by ’ * 

thatwhich covers the tombof Muhammad 

constructed on the same plan and 124 ft 

in diameter ; but the smaller dimensions 

here employed enabled the architect to 413 PUn and section of imtiier 
use taller and more graceful outlines, and 

•r u u J L J ..u “ .. • ..u Scale 50 ft to i in. 

if he had had the courage to pierce the 

niches at the base of his dome, and make them into windows, he 


would probably have had the credit of designing the most graceful 
building of its class in existence. 



413. Section on the line A B through the Great Dome of the J&mi’ Ma^jid. 
(From a Drawing by Mr Cumniing.) Scale 50 ft. to i ia. 


At the east corners of the court two min&rs were to have 
been erected, but only that on the north was properly b^un ; 
and, at a later date, the court was extended 95 ft. eastwards, 
and a large gatew^ constructed in the centre of the front, 
together with part of an arcade on the south of it 

If the plan of this mosque is compared with that of Kulbarga 




a7> 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


(Woodcut No. 408), it will be seen what immense strides the 
Indian architects had made in constructive skill and elegance 
of detail during the century and a half that elapsed between 
the erection of these two buildings. If they were drawn to the 
same scale ‘this would be more apparent than it is at first 
sight ; but on half the present scale the details of the Kulbaiga 
mosque could hardly be expressed, while the largeness of the 
parts, and regularity of arrangement can, in the scale adopted, 
be made perfectly clear in the Bijdpfir example. The latter 
is, undoubtedly, the more perfect of the two, but there is a 
picturesqueness about the earlier building, and a poetry about 
its arrangements, that go far to make up for the want of the 
skill and the elegance exhibited in its more modem rival. 

The tomb which ’Alt ’Adil Shah II. (1656-1672) commenced 
for himself was placed on a high square basement, measuring 
215 ft. each way, and had it been completed as designed would 
have rivalled any tomb in India. The central apartment is 
79 ft. square, and is surrounded by a double arcade, the arches 
of which resemble the Gothic form being struck from two 
centres, and the curves reaching the crown. 

It is one of the disadvantages of the Turanian system of 
each king building his own tomb, that if he dies early his work 
remains unfinished. This defect is more than compensated 

in practice by the fact 
that unless a man builds 
his own sepulchre, the 
chances are very much 
against anything worthy 
of admiration being dedi- 
cated to h!:. memory by 
his surviving relatives. 

His grandfather, 
Ibrdhim 11.(1579-1626) 
had commenced his 
mausoleum on so small 
a plan — 1 16 ft. square — 
that, as he enjoyed a 
long and prosperous 
reign, it was only by 
ornament that he could 

414. Tomb or Rauza of Ibrahim. (From a Plan Ijv 

Mr Cummins.) Sc*ie ,o ft. to i in. ' render it Worthy of him- 
self, his favourite wife, 
and other members of his family.’ This, however, he accomplished 

^ Zohra Sultdna, his favourite daughter, of whom an inscription states that the 
and his mother occupy the graves on t Rauza is a memorial'; and the graves of 
each ude of Ibrfibim’s ; ^s wife Tdj i two sons complete the series. 

Sttltdna’s is next her mother-in-law’s, • 




Chap. IX. BIJAPUR. J73 

by covering every part with the most exquisite and elaborate 
carvings. The ornamental inscriptions are so numerous that it 
is said the whole Qor&n is engraved on its walls. The cornices 
are supported by the most elaborate bracketing, the windows 
filled with tracery, and every part so richly ornamented that had 
his artists not been Indians it might have become vulgar. 
Plate XXX. shows the eastern facade of this fine mausoleum. 

The principal apartment in the tomb is a square of 39 ft. 
10 in. each way, covered by a stone roof, perfectly flat in the 
centre, formed of stone slabs set edge to edge, and supported 
only by a cove projecting 7 ft. 7 in. from the walls on every 
side. How the roof is supported is a mystery which can only 
be understood by those who are familiar with the use the 
Indians make of masses of concrete, and with exceedingly good 
mortar, which seem capable of infinite applications. Above 
this apartment is another in the dome as ornamental as the 
one below it, though its only object is to obtain externally the 
height required for architectural effect, and access to its interior 
can only be obtained by a dark narrow stair in the thickness 
of the wall. 

Beside the tomb there is an equally-fine mosque to corre- 
spond ; and the royal garden, in which these are situated, was 
adorned, as usual, internally with fountains and kiosks, and 
externally with colonnades and caravansarais for strangers and 
pilgrims, the whole making up a group as rich and as pictur- 
esque as any in India, and far 
excelling anything of the sort 
on this side of the Hellespont. 

The tomb of his successor, 

Muhammad (1636- 1660) was 
in design as complete a con- 
trast to that just described as 
can well be conceived, and is 
as remarkable for simple gran- 
deur and constructive boldness 
as that of Ibr&him was for ex- 
cessive richness and contempt 
of constructive proprieties. It 
is constructed on the same 
principle as that employed in 
the design of the dome of the 
great mosque (Woodcut No. 

41 3), but on so much larger a 
scale as to convert into a wonder of constructive skill, what, 
in that instance, was only an eluant architectural design. 

As will be seen from the plan, it is internally a square 



474 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. BobK VII. 


apartment, 135 ft. 5 in. each way; its area consequently is 
18,337 ft., while that of the Pantheon at Rome is, within 
the walls, only 15,833 sq. ft; and even taking into account all 
the recesses in the walls of both buildings, this is still the 
larger of the two. 

At the height of 57 ft from the floor-line the hall begins 
to contract, by a series of pendentives as ingenious as they 
are beautiful, to a circular opening 97 ft. in diameter. On the 
platform of these pendentives at a height of 109 ft. 6 in., the 
dome is erected, 124 ft. 5 in. in diameter, thus leaving a gallery 
more than 12 ft. wide all round the interior. Internally, the 
dome is 178 ft above the floor, and externally 198 ft. from the 
outside platform ; its thickness at the springing is about 10 ft., 
and at the crown 9 ft 

The most ingenious and novel part of the construction of 



416. Pendentives of the Tomb of Muhammad, looking upwards. (From a Di awing by 
Mr Gumming.) ^ale 50 ft. to i in. 

this dome is the mode in which its lateral or outward thrust 
is counteracted. This was accomplished b\' forming the 
pendentives so that they not only cut ofl' the angles, but 
that, as shown in the plan, their arches intersect one another, 
and form a very considerable, mass of masonry perfectly 
stable in itself; and, by its weight acting inwards, counter- 
acting any thrust that can possibly be brought to bear upon it 
by the pressure of the aome. If the whole edifice thus 



Chap. IX. BIJAPUR. 175 

balanced has any tendency to move, it is to fall inwards, which 
from its circular form is impossible; while the action of the 
weight of the pendentives being in the opposite direction to 
that of the dome, it acts like a tie, and keeps the whole in 
equilibrium, without interfering at all with the outline of the 
dome. 

In the Pantheon and most European domes a great mass 
of masonry is thrown on the haunches, which entirely hides 
the external form, and is a singularly clumsy expedient in 
every respect compared with the elegant mode of hanging the 
weight inside. 



417. Section of Tomb of Muhammad at BijApCir. Scale 50 ft. to i in. 

Notwithstanding that this expedient gives the dome a 
perfectly stable basis to stand upon, which no thrust can 
move, still, looking at the section (Wo^cut No. 417), its^ form 
is such that it apiiears almost paradoxical that such a building 




2^6 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


should stand. If the section represented an arch or a vault, 
it is such as would not stand one hour ; but the dome is itself 
so perfect as a constructive expedient, that it is almost as 
difficult to build a dome that will fall as it is to build a vault 
that will stand. As the dome is also, artistically, the most 
beautiful form of roof yet invented, it may be well, before 
passing from the most extraordinary and complex example 
yet attempted anywhere, to pause and examine a little more 
closely the theory of its construction. 

Let us suppose the diagram to represent the plan of a 
perfectly flat dome loo ft. in diameter, and each rim conse* 
quently lo ft. wide. 

Further assuming for convenience that the whole dome 
weighs 7,850 tons, the outer rim will weigh 2,826, or almost 
exactly as much as the three inner rims put together; the 
next will weigh 2,204, 1,568, the next 942, and the 

inner only 314; so that a considerable extra thickness might 
be heaped on it, or on the two inner ones, without their pre- 
ponderance at all affecting ' the stability of the dome ; but 
this is the most unfavourable view to take of the case. To 
understand the problem more clearly, let us suppose the 



semicircle AAA (Woodcut No. 418) to represent the section 
of a hemispherical dome. The first segment of this, though 
only 10 ft. in width, will be 30 ft. in height, and will weigh 9,420 
tons ; the next, 10 ft. high and 10 ft. wide, will weigh 3,140 ; the 
third, 10 ft. by 6 ft., will weigh only 1,884 i the fourth will 
weigh 942 ; and the central portion, as before, 316. 

Now it is evident that the first portion, A B, being the 
most perpendicular, is the one least liable to disturbance or 
thrust, and, being also two-thirds of the whole weight of the 
dome, if steady and firmly constructed, it is a more than suffi- 
cient abutment for the remaining third, which is the whole 
of the rest of the dome. 



Chap. IX. BIJAPUR. 

It is evident from an inspection of the figure, or from any 
section of the dome, how easy it must be to construct the first 
segment from the springing; and if this is very solidly built 
and placed on an immoveable basis, the architect may play 
with the rest ; and he must be clumsy indeed if he cannot 
make it perfectly stable. In the East, they did play with their 
domes, and made them of all sorts of fantastic forms, seeking 
to please the eye more than to consult the engineering neces- 
sities of the case, and yet it is the rarest possible contingency to 
find a dome that has fallen through faults in the construction. 

In Europe architects have been timid and unskilled in 
dome-building; but with our present engineering knowledge 
it would be easy to construct far larger and more daring domes 
than even this of Muhammad’s tomb, without the smallest fear 
of accident. 

The external ordonnance of this building is as beautiful as 
that of the interior. At each angle stands an octagonal tower 
eight storeys high, simple and bold- in its proportions, and 
crowned by a dome of great elegance. The lower part of the 
building is plain and solid, pierced only with such openings 
as are requisite to admit light and air ; at the height of 83 ft 
a cornice projects to the extent of 12 ft. from the wall, or 
nearly twice as much as the boldest European architect ever 
attempted. Above this an open gallery gives lightness and 
finish to the whole, each face being further relieved by two 
small minarets. 

The same daring system of construction was carried out 
by the architects of BiJApur in their civil buildings. The great 
Audience Hall or Gagan Mahall (a.d. 1561), for instance (Wood- 
cut No. 419), opens in front with a central arch 60 ft. 9 in. wide, 
which, had it been sufficiently abutted, might have been a grand 
architectural feature ; as it is, it is too like an engineering work 
to be satisfactory. Its cornice was in wood, and some of its 
supports are still in their places. Indeed, it is one of the 
peculiarities of the architecture of this city that, like the 
English architects in their roofs, those of BijApur clung to 
wood as a constructive expedient long after its use had been 
abandoned in other parts of India. The AsAr-i-MubArak or 
AsAr Mahall, is entirely open on one side, the roof being 
supported only by two wooden pillars with immense bracket- 
capitals ; and the internal ornaments are in the same material. 
The result of this practice was the same at BiJApfir as in England 
— far greater depth of framing and greater richness in archi- 
tectural ornamentation, and an intolerance of constructive 
awkwardness which led to the happiest results in both countries. 

Among the edifices in the city is the SAt-Manzila, one of 



278 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


those seven*storeyed palaces which come across us so strangely 
in all out-of'the-way corners of the world. Add to this that 
the As8r-i-Mub8rak has been converted by the Muhammadans 
into a relic-shrine to contain some hairs of the Prophet's beard, 



and we have a picture of the strange difficulty of weaning a 
Tartar from the innate prejudices of his race. 

Besides these two there were five other palaces within the 
walls, some of them of great splendour, and numberless 
residences of the nobles and attendants of the court. But 
about twenty years ago the Bombay Government adapted a 
number of these old buildings to nindern requirements: the 
Bukhara Masjid has been used as a post office, and the mosque 
belonging to Muhammad’s great tomb was turned into a 
travellers’ rest-house, but both have again been restored ; the 
’Ad&lat Mahall was converted into the collector’s residence, and 
the SOraj Mahall into outhouses'; the Chini Mahall into public 
offices ; the Anand Mahall into a residence (or the Assistant 
Collector; Y&qut Daball's Mahall into a traveller’s bangU; 
Kawiss Khan’s tomb and mosque into house and office for 
the Executive Engineer ; the Chhota Chtnl Mahall into a house 
for the Police Superintendent ; and the ’Arsh Mahall into the 
Civil Surgeon’s residence. 

One of the most remarkable edifices is a little gateway, 
known as the Mihtari Mahall. It is in a mixed Hindi! and 




Chap. IX. 


GOLKONDA. 


*79 


Muhammadan style, every part and every detail covered with 
ornament, but ahvap equally appropriate and elegant It is 
about 24 ft. square in plan and three storeys high, surmounted 
in front by two slender turrets. On the first floor are remark- 
ably fine balcony windows on each of the four sides. The floors 
of the first and second storeys are constructed in the same way 
as that in the Ibr&htm Rauza. It formed the entrance to a 
mosque, and of its class it is perhaps the best example in the 
country, though this class may not be the highest. 

The gigantic walls of the city itself, 6^ miles in circumference, 
are a work of no mean magnitude, and, combined with the tombs 
of those who built them, and with the ruins of the suburbs of this 
once great city, they make up a scene of grandeur in desolation, 
equal to anything else now to be found even in India.^ 

If the materials were available for the purpose, it would be 
extremely interesting, from a historical point of view, to trace 
the various styles that grew out of each other as the later 
dynasties of the Dekhan succeeded one another and strove to 
surpass their predecessors in architectural magnificence in their 
successive capitals. With the exception, however, of Bij&pOr, 
none of the Dekhani cities produced ' edifices that, taken by 
themselves irrespective of their surroundings and historical im- 
portance, seem to be, so far as we yet know, of great value in an 
artistic sense. 

Burh&npur, which was the capital of the Fftruql dynasty of 
K&ndesh, from A.D. 1370 to 1596, docs possess some buildings 
remarkable for their extent and picturesque in their decay, 
but of very little artistic value, and many of them — especially 
the later ones — in very questionable taste. Ahmadnagar, the 
capital of the Nizcim Sh&ht dynasty, A.D. 1490 to 1607, is 
singularly deficient in architectural grandeur, considering how 
long it was the capital of an important dynasty. 

Golkonda, the chosen seat of the Qutb Shdht dynasty, 
A.D. 1512 to 1687, lies 6 miles north-west from Haidar&bftd. 
The first of the dynasty was Quit Qutbu-l-Mulk, a Tfirkm&n or 
Persian in the service of Mahmfid Sh&h II. Bahmant, who rose 
to be governor of the Teling&na districts, and who assumed 
independence in 1512. Ibr&htm, the third king, Ferishta tells 


' Besides the two larger works 
mentioned above, p» 269, note, Mr 
Fergusson contributed to the ‘Trans- 
actions of the Royal Institute of British 
Architects,’ 1st ser. vol. v. (1854-55), 

I wo papers: (i) ‘ Architectural Splendour 
of the City of Beejapore,’ Nov. 1854; I 


and (2) 'The Great Dome of Sultan 
Muhammed,’ Dec. 1854. Mr Cousens 
made a survey of the Bijapfir buildings 
several years ago, but the results have 
not yet been published. His ' Guide to 
Bijapur ’ (1907) is a useful handbook. 



aSo INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE, Book VII. 

us, was a great builder, the country being then in a very flourish- 
ing condition ; and his son, Muhammad Quit, founded BSgnagar 
now Haidar&bftd, the Niz&m’s capital. The tombs of the kings 
of this dynasty, and of their nobles and families here, form as 
extensive and as picturesque a group as is to be found any- 
where ; they are just outside the walls, to the north-west of the 
city, and are not unworthy of a place in history if the materials 
were available for illustrating them properly. They stand on a 
slightly raised site, each in the centre of a large quadrangular 
terrace, and had each a small mosque or musalld attached. The 
tomb of Muhammad Quit Qutb, erected about 1625, one of the 
largest and finest, is an imposing structure, with a fine frieze 
over the main storey. It was once ornamented with coloured 
tiles and excited the admiration of Thevenot who visited and 
described it in 1667. Among others of pleasing proportions is 
that of Abdulla Qutb Shih — ^the sixth king (1625-1672) — with 
rich parapets and cornices round the principal and upper storeys. 
Near by is the tomb of his mother, Haiyat Bakhsh Begam, who 
died in 1617 : it is about 65 ft. square, and structurally is of the 
style of her son’s. Several of these tombs were repaired by the 
late Sir S&l&r .Jang. There are also on the outskirts of the city 
other mausolea of the nobles of the court, in various architectural 
styles; of these Plate XXXI. illustrates* two examples. But 
until the group has been drawn, and intelligently described in 
some detail'i^e can hardly estimate their merits, which we know 
generally to be considerable. 

Sindh. 

Among the minor styles of Muhammadan art in India there 
is one that would be singularly interesting in a Historical sense 
if a sufficient number of examples exist^ to elucidate it, and 
they were of sufficient antiquity to connect the style with those 
of the West. From its situation, almost outside India, the 
province of Sindh must always have had a certain affinity with 
Persia and the countries lying to the westward of the Indus, 
and if we knew its architectural histoiy we might probably be 
able to trace to their source many of the forms we cannot now 
explain, and join the styles of the East with those of the West 
in a manner we cannot at present pretend to accomplish. 

The buildings in this province were nearly always in brick, 
stone being scarce; and though they are not exposed to the 
destructive agencies of v^etation like those of Bengal, the 
mortar is bad, and salt in the soil rises and disintegrates the 
bricks, which are easily picked out and utilised by the natives to 
build their huts or villages. 



Chap. IX. 


SINDH. 


aSi 

Most of what we at present know belong to a series of tombs 
in the neighbourhood of Tatta, which were erected under the 
Mughal djrnasty by the governors or great men of the province, 
during their sway. At least the oldest now known is that of 
J&m Nizftmu-d-Dtn built in 1508, almost coeval with which is 
the Dabgir mosque of 1509, and later is the tomb -of Amtr 
Khalil Khin, erected in or about A.D. 1572, the year in which 
Akbar deposed the J&mi dynasty and annexed Sindh to his 
empire. The tombs or mosques of the earlier dynasties have 
not yet been surveyed and described. The later series extends 
from A.D. 1572-1640, and all show a strongly-marked affinity to 
the Persian style of the same or an earlier age. One example 
must for the present suffice to explain their general appearance, 
for they are all very much alike. It is the tomb of Sharfa Kh&n, 



420 , Tomb of NawAb Sharfa KhAn, near Tatta, A.n. 1640. (From a photograph.) 


the Naw&b or minister to Amir KhAn, who was governor of the 
province in the reign of ShAh JahAn, from A.D. 1627 to 1632, and 
afterwards A.D. 1641 to 1650. The tomb was built apparently in 
A.D. 1638 (Woodcut No. 420). It is 38 ft. 4 in. square, is of 
glazed colour^ brick, the foundation and plinth are of stone. 





283 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


but it was, like all the others of its class, ornamented with 
coloured tiles, like those of Persia generally, of great beauty of 
pattern and exquisite harmony of colouring.^ It is not a very 
monumental way of adorning a building, but, as carried out on 
the dome of the Rock at Jerusalem, in the middle of the i6th 
or in the mosque at Tabriz in the beginning of the 13th century,^ 
and generally in Persian buildings, it is capable of producing the 
most pleasing effects. 

Like thp other tombs in the province, it is so similar to 
Persian buildings of the same age, and so unlike any other found 
at the same age in India Proper, that we can have little doubt 
as to the nationality of those who erected them. 


^ Abundant examples of coloured 
tiles from the Jdmi’ Masjid at Tatta, 
erected about 1646, and from tombs and 
moKjues in the province have been 
published in a ‘ Portfolio of Illustrations 
of Sind Tiles,* by Mr. H. Cousens (fifty 
plates, atlas folio), 1906. But, except a 


section of the J^mi* Masjid at Tatta, there 
are no drawings — plans and sections — to 
explain the positions of the specimens in 
the various mosques and tombs from 
which they are copied. 

- * History of Ancient and Medieval 
Architecture,’ vol. ii. p. 573. 



CHAPTER X. 


MUGHAL ARCHITECTURE. 


CONTENTS. 

Dynasties — Tomb of Muhammad Ghaus, Gwdliar — Mosque at Fathpur 
Sikri — Akbar’s Tomb, Sikandara — Palace at Delhi — The TAj Mahall — 
The Mott Masjid — Mosque at Delhi — The Martini&re, Begam Kotht, and 
Imfimbflr^ at Lucknow — English Tombs at Surat — Tomb at Jun&gadh. 


CHRONOLOGY. 

Bdbar A.D. 1526 Akbar . A.D. 1556 

HumdyAn .... 1530 Jahingir . 1005 

Sh£r ShAh Afghan . 1539 Sh&hjah&n . l6a8 

Saltni IslAm ShAh . 1545 Aurangztb or ’Alamgir 1658 

dies .... 1552 BahAdur Shfih . 1707 

Till within half a century ago, a description of the style intro- 
duced by the Mughal emperors would have been considered a 
complete history of Muhammadan architecture in India. It 
is the «style which was described by Roe and Bernier, and all 
subsequent travellers. It was rendered familiar to the public 
in Europe by the drawings of Daniell, in the beginning of last 
century, and, since Agra and Delhi became practically British 
cities, their buildings have been descried, drawn, and 

photographed till they have become almost as well known as 
any found in Europe. It will take a very long time before 
even photography will render the mosques or tombs of such 
cities as Ahmad^b^d or Bij&piir as familiar or as easily under- 
stood. Yet it is, perhaps, true to assert that the buildings of 
other dynasties, commencing with the mosques at the Qutb and 
at Ajmir, and continuing till the last Dakhani dynasty was 
destroyed by Aurangztb, make up a whole as extensive and 
more interesting, in a historical point of view> than even all 
that was done by the Mughals. On the other hand, however, 
there is a unity in the works of that dynasty, and a complete- 
ness in their history, which makes the study of their art 
peculiarly fascinating, and some of their buildings will bear 



384 INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 

comparison, in some respects, with any architectural productions 
in any part of the world. Their buildings, however, are so 
original, and so unlike any of the masterpieces of art that we 
are generally acquainted with, that it is almost impossible to 
institute any comparison between them which shall be satis- 
factory. How, for instance, can we compare the Parthenon 
with the T8j? They are buildings of nearly equal size and 
magnificence, both in white marble, both admirably adapted 
for the purposes for which they were built ; but what else have 
they in common ? The one is simple in its outline, and depend- 
ing on pillars for its external adornment; the other has no 
pillars, and owes its greatest effects to its singularly varied 
outline and the mode in which its various parts are disposed, 
many of them wholly detached from the principal mass. The 
Parthenon belongs, it is true, to a higher class of art, its 
sculptures raising it into the region of the most intellectual 
branch of phonetic art ; but, on the other hand, the exquisite 
inlay of precious stones at the Tij is so zsthetically beautiful 
as, in a merely architectural estimate, almost to bring it on a 
level with the Grecian masterpiece.^ 

Though their value, consequently, may be nearly the same, 
their forms are so essentially different that they hardly look 
like productions of the same art ; and in an art so essentially 
conventional as architecture always is and must be, it requires 
long familiarity with any new form, and a knowledge of its 
origin and use^ that can only be acquired by constant study, 
which makes it very difficult for a stranger to realise the Veal 
beauty that often underlies even the strangest forms. When, 
however, these difficulties are conquered, it will probably be 
found that there are few among the Eastern styles that deserve 
more attention, and would better repay any study that might 
be bestowed upon them, than the architecture of the Mughals. 

Some little interruptions are experienced at the beginning 
of the narrative from the interpolation of the reigns of Sher Sh^h 
and his son Saltm or IslAm in the reign of HumAyun. He was 
an AfghAn by descent and an Indian by birth, and, had he been 


^ Adopting the numerical scale de- 
scribed in the introduction to the * True 
Principles of Beauty in Art/ p. 140 
(' History of Ancient and Medieval 
Architecture/ vol. i. pp. 5, 6), 1 estimated 
the Parthenon as possessing 4 parts of 
technic value, 4 of aesthetic, and 4 
phonetic^ or 24 as its Index number, 
the highest known* The Tiij I 
should bn the contrary estimate as ! 


possessing 4 technic, 5 *^sthctic, and 2 
phonetic, not tliai it has any direct 
phonetic mode of utterance, but from the 
singular and pathetic distinctness with 
which every part of it gives utterance to 
the sorrow and affection it was erected 
to express. Its index number would con- 
seq^uently be 20, which is certainly as high 
as It can be brought, and near enough to 
the Parthenon for comparison at least. 



Chap. X. MUGHAL ARCHITECTURE. 285 

left to follow his own devices, would, no doubt, have built in the 
style of architecture used at Agra and Delhi before his country- 
men were disturbed by the Mughal invasion. We have, it is 
true, very little to tell us what that style was during the lyo 
years that elapsed between the death of Tughlaq Sh&h and the 
first invasion of Bibar, but it seems to have l^n singularly 
plain and solid, and very unlike the florid art introduced by the 
Mughals, and practised by Sher Shib and his son apparently 
in rivalry to the new master of Hindustan. So little difference 
is there, however, between the architecture of Sher Shih and of 
Akbar that they must be treated as one style, b^inning in g^at 
sobriety and elegance, and ending in something nearly approach- 
ing to wildness and exuberance of decoration, but still very 
beautiful — in some respects superior to the chaste but feeble 
elegance of the later Mughal style that succeeded it. 

There is, again, a little difficulty and confusion in our having 
no examples of the style as practised by B&bar and HumiyAn. 
The well-known tomb of the latter king was certainly built by 
his son Akbar ; Bflbar was buried near K&bul, and no building 
known to be his has yet been identified in India. Yet that he 
did build is certain. In his own ‘Memoirs’ he tells us, “In 
Agra alone, and of the stone-cutters belonging to that place 
only, I every day employed on my palaces 680 persons; and 
in Agra, Sikrt, Biflnfl, Dholpur, Gwiliar, and Koil, there were 
every day employed on my works 1491 stone-cutters.”^ In the 
following pages he describes some of these works, and especially 
a Baolt of great magnificence he excavated in the fort of Agra.* 
This was in the year 1526, and he lived to carry on these works 
for five years longer. During the ten years that his son retained 
the empire, we learn from Ferishta and other sources that he 
adorned his capital with many splendid edifices : one, a palace 
containing seven pavilions or audience halls — one dedicated to 
each of the planets, in which he gave audience on the day of the 
week dedicated to the planet of the day.* There are traditions 
of a mosque he is said to have built on the banks of the Jamncl, 
opposite where the Tfij now stands; and his name is so frequently 
mentioned in connection with buildings both at Agra and Delhi 
that there can be little doubt that he was a builder to as great 
an extent as the troubled character of his reign would admit of. 
But his buildings have perished, so that practically the history 
of Mughal architecture commences with the buildings of an 
Afghin dynasty who occupied the throne of India for sixteen 
years during the last part of Hum&yQn’s lifetime. 

* ‘Memoirs,* translated by Erskine, - Lot. cit. pp. 341-342. 
p, 334. ’ Brigg’s translation, vol. ii. p. 71* 



a86 INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 

It is probable that very considerable light will yet be thrown 
upon the origin of the style which the Mughals introduced 
into India, from an examination of the buildings erected at 
Samarkand by Timur a hundred years before Bihar’s time 
(A.D. I393-I404)> Now that city is in the hands of the Russians, 
it is accessible to Europeans. Its buildings have been drawn 
and photographed, but not yet described so as to be available 
for scientinc purposes, but sufficiently so to indicate the direction 
in which light may be expected. Though a frightful savage 
in most respects, Timur was possessed of a true Tiirki love for 
noble architecture; and though he generally massacred the 
inhabitants of any town that resisted him, he always spared the 
architects and artists, and sent them to work on the embellish- 
ment of his capitals. Samarkand was consequently filled with 
splendid edifices, but, so far as can be judged from the materials 
available, more resembling in style those of Persia than anything 
now known to exist in India. The bulbous dome appears every- 
where, and was not known at that time in India, unless it was in 
the quasi-Persian province of Sindh. Coloured tiles were the 
favourite mode of decoration, and altogether their style was 
goigeous in the extreme as compared with the sobriety of the 
later Pathin buildings in India. 

' ' SHER SHAH,A.Di 1539-1545. 

Certainly one of the most remarkable men who ever ruled 
.in northern India, though his reign was limited to only five years’ 
duration; and during that brief space, disturbed by all the 
troubles incident to a usurpation, Sher Shih left his impress on 
eveiy branch of the administration. The revenue system, the 
police, the army administration, all the great reforms, in fact, 
which Akbar so successfully carried out, were commenced, and to 
some extent perfected, by this usurper, as the Mughals call him. 
In architecture, too, which most concerns us here, he certainly 
pointed out the path by which his successor reached such 
eminence. 

The most perfect of his buildings that 1 am acquainted with 
is the mosque in the Purdnfl Kil^ or Kil& Kohn4 at Delhi. The 
walls of this place were repaired by Hum&yUn in A.D. 1533, and, 
according to ^e latest authorities, it is said to have been built 
by Sher Sh&h in A.D. 1541 (Plate XXXI I.y It is a single hall, 
with five openings in front through pointed arches of what 
we would call Tudor form, but beautifully varied in design, and 

* Cnnnincham, ' Reports,’ vol. i. p. 322 j vol. iv. p. 74 ; Carr Suplien’s ‘ Atch*- 
ology of Oefni,’ p. 190 ; Fansliatve’s ‘ Delhi,’ p. 338, from which the plate is taken. 



Chap. X. MUGHAL ARCHITECTURE. 987 

arranged in panels carved with the most exquisite designs and 
ornamented with parti-coloured marbles. It is 168 ft. Tong by 
44 ft. 6 in. udde, and about 44 ft. high. The brackets under the 
^Iconies are the precursors of the type so mulced in the r^ 
sandstone palace in the fort at Agra ; and the pendentives inside, 
below the dome, are effective. One important dome, pierced 
with twelve small windows, crowns the centre ; it has, however, 
no minarets and no courtyard, but even without these adjuncts it 
is one of the most satisfactory buildings of its class in India. 

In the citadel at Agra there stood when I was there, a 
fra|fment of a palace built by Sher Sh&h, or his son Salfm, 
which was as exquisite a piece of decorative art as anything 
of its class in India. Being one of the first to occupy the 
ground, this palace was erected on the highest spot within the 
fort ; hence our Government, fancying this a favourable site for 
the erection of a barrack, pulled it down, and replaced it by a 
more than usually hideous brick erection of their own. This 
afterwards became a warehouse, and* looms, in whitewashed 
ugliness, over the marble palaces of the Mughals — a fit standard 
of comparison of the tastes of the two races.^ 

Judging from the fragment that remains, and the accounts 
received on the spot, this palace must have gone far to justify 
the eulogium more than once passed on the works of these 
Pathins — that “they built like giants, and finished like gold- 
smiths : ” for the stones seem to have been of enormous size, and 
the details of most exquisite finish. It has passed away, how- 
ever, like many another noble building of its class, under the 
ruthless barbarism of our rule. Mosques we have gfenerally 
spared, and sometimes tombs, because they were unsuited to our 
economic purposes, and it would not answer to offend the 
religious feelings of the natives. But when we deposed the kit^s, 
and appropriated their revenues, there was no one to claim their 
now useless abodes of splendour. It was consequently found 
cheaper either to pull them down, or use them as residences 
or arsenals, than to keep them up, so that very few now remain 
for the admiration of posterity. 

The tomb of Sher Sh&h has been already described {ohU, 
p. 218), as it is essentially Pathdn in style. It was erected at 
his native place in Bih&r, to the south of the Ganges, far from 
Mughal influence at that time, and in the style of severe 
simplicity that characterised the works of his race between the 


* As I cannot find any trace of this 
building in Keene’s description of the 
fort in his book on Agra, 1 presume it 
must have been utilised since my day. 


Unless it is the building he calls the 
Nobut Khana of Akhar’s palace (26). I 
have never seen it in any photograph of 
the place. 



388 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


times of Tughlaq and those of Bahlol Lodi (A.D. I451-I489), the 
last really independent king of his line. 

It is not quite clear how much of the tomb was built by 
himself, or how much by his son Saltm, who certainly finished 
it Saltm also built the Saltmgarh on an island in the Jamnft, 
which Sh8h Jah8n afterwards connected by a bridge with his 
palaM in New Delhi. Whether, however, he erected any 
buildings inside is not certain — ^nothing at least now remains 
of any importance. Generally he seems to have carried on 
and completed his father’s buildings, and between them they 
have left a group of architectural remains which, if collected 
together and illustrated, would form an interesting chapter in 
the history of Indian*Muhammadan styles.^ 

Akbar, 1556-1605. 

It would require a volume to describe all the buildings 
erected by this remarkable man during his long reign of forty- 
nine years, and a hundred plates would hardly suffice to make 
known all their peculiarities. Had Akbar been content to 
follow in the lines of the style invented by the Path8ns and 
perfected under Sher Sh&h, it might be easy enough tO' follow 
the sequence, but nothing in his character is so remarkable as 
the spirit of tolerance that pervaded all his acts. He seems 
to have had As sincere a love and admiration for his Hindi! 
subjects as. he had for those of his own creed, and whether 
from policy or inclination, to have cherished their arts as 
much as he did those that belonged exclusively to his own 
people. The consequence is a mixture throughout all his 
works of two styles, often more picturesque than correct, which 
might, in the course of another half century, have been blended 
into a completely new style if persevered in. The spirit of 
tolerance^ however, died with him. There is no trace of 
Hinduism in the works of JahAngIr or Shlh JahAn, and 
Aurangztb would have been horrified at the suggestion that 
arts of the infidels could influence anything he did. 

One probably of his earliest works was the mausoleum, 
which he erected over the remkins of his father, HumAyfln, 
at Delhi. Though it certainly was finished by Akbar, it was 
commenced by his widow, HAjI Begam Maryam-makAnI, and 


^ It is not quite clear how much 
Rhot&srarh owes its magnificence to Sher 
Sh&h, how much to Akbar ; both cer- 
tainly built there, and on the spot it 
might easily be ascertained how much 
belongs to each. Unfortunately the 


British ** converted the beautiful Diw&n 
Khina, of which Daniell published a 
drawing, into a stable for breeding 
horses. — Hamilton’s * Gazetteer,* svSt 
voce. 



Chap. X. MUGHAL ARCHITECTURE. 2^9 

completed in 1565, at a cost of fifteen Ukhs of rupees; for, 
as frequently remarked in the previous pages of this work, 
the great architectural peculiarity of the Tartar or Mongolian 
races is their tomb-building propensity, in which they are so 
strongly distinguished from the Aryan, and also from the great 
Semitic families, with whom they divide the greater part of 
the habitable globe. Nowhere is this more forcibly illustrated 
than in India — ^where the tombs of the Pathins and Mughals 
form a complete, and unbroken series of architectural monu- 
ments from the first years of the Moslim invasion to the 
present hour. 

The tombs of the Path&ns are less splendid than those of 
the Mughals; but nevertheless the whole series is singularly 
interesting, the tombs being far more numerous than the 
mosques. Generally speaking, also, they are more artistic in 
design, and frequently not only larger but more splendidly 
decorated than the buildings exclusively devoted to prayer. 

The princes of the Tartar races, in carrying out their love 
of tombs, made it the practice to build their own in their 
lifetime, as. all people must who are really desirous of sepulchral 
magnificence. In doing this they rejected the Egyptian -mode 
of preparing dark and deep chambers in the heart of the rock, 
or of the massive pyramid. The Tartars, on the other hand, 
built their sepulchres of such a character as to serve for places 
of enjoyment for themselves and their friends during their 
lifetime, and only when they could enjoy them no longer they 
became the solemn resting-places of their mortal remains. 

The usual process for the erection of these structures is for 
the king or noble who intends to provide himself a tomb to 
enclose a garden outside the city walls, generally with high 
crenellated walls, and with one or more splendid gateways ; 
and in the centre of this he erects a square or octagonal 
building, crowned by a dome, and in the more splendid 
eScamples with smaller and dome-roofed apartments on four of 
the sides or angles, the other four being devoted to entrances. 
This building is generally situated on a lofty square terrace, 
from which radiate four broad alleys, generally with marble- 
paved canals, ornamented with fountains ; a mosque is an 
essential adjunct; the angular spaces are planted with cypresses 
and other evergreens and fruit-trees, making up one of those 
formal but beautiful gardens so characteristic of 'the East. 
During the lifetime of the founder, the central building is 
called a B^ra-‘dari, summer house or festal hall, and is used 
as a place of recreation and feasting by him and his friends. 

At his death its destination is changed — ^the found^s remains 
are interred beneath the central dome. Sometimes his favourite 



•90 INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 

wife lies beside him; but more generally his family and 
relations are buried beneath the collateral domes. When once 
used as a place of burial, its vaults never again resound with 
festive mirth. The care of the building is handed over to 
priests and faqirs, who gain a scanty subsistence by the sale 
of the fruits of the garden, or the alms of those who come to 
visit the last resting-place of their friend or master. Perfect 
silence takes the place of festivity and mirth. The beauty of 
the surrounding objects combines with the repose of the place 
to produce an effect as graceful as it is solemn and appropriate. 

Though the tombs, with the remains of their enclosures, 
are so numerous throughout all India, the Tij Mahall, at Agra, 
is almost the only tomb that retains its garden in anything 
like its pristine beauty, and there is not perhaps in the whole 
world a scene where nature and art so successfully combine 
to produce a perfect work of art as within the precincts of 
this far-famed mausoleum. 

The tomb of Hum&yfin Sh&h, the first of the Mughals who 
was buried in India, still stands tolerably entire among the 
ruins of Old Delhi, of which indeed it forms the principal and 
most striking object (Plate XXXIII.). It stands well on a large 
square platfom), 22 ft. in height, adorned with arches, whose piers 
are ornament^ with an inlay of white marble. The tomb itself 
is an octagonal apartment, 47 ft. 4 in. across, crowned by a dome 
of white marble, of very g^raceful contour externally. Four sides 
of the octagon are occupied by the entrances; the other four 
smaller octagonal apartments, 23 ft. wide, are attached*; these 
project from the fa9ades of the central bays on each face, and 
the amount of white marble on them, gives them prominence. 
In the comer rooms are the tombs of Hij! Begam and some 
nine others of the royal race. These apartments make up a 
building nearly square in plan, about 155 ft. each way, with 
the angles slightly cut away.^ Its plan is in fact that after- 
wards adopted at the Tl.j (Woodcut No. 433), but used here 
without the depth and poetry of that celebrated building. Its 
most marked characteristic, however, is its purity — it might 
almost be called poverty — of desi2;n. It is so very unlike any- 
thing else that Akbar ever built, that it is hardly possible it could 
have been designed by him. It has not even the picturesque 
boldness of the earlier Pathftn tombs, and in fact looks more 
like buildings a century at least more modem than it really is. 
It is, however, as will be seen from the photograph, a noble 
tomb, and an}rwhere else must be considered a wonder. 


1 111 the upi^r storey of the building round the drum supporting the dome, are 
rooms apd pavilions once occupied by a college, long since deserted. 



Chap. X. 


MUGHAL ARCHITECTURE. 


391 


To illustrate the architecture of the ds^, however, it oiay 
be preferable to_ take the contemporary tomb of Muh am mad 
Ghaus^ at Gwiliar, which was erected during the early part 
of Akbar’s reign, and is a singularly interesting example of 
the tombs of the period. 

It is a square, measur- 
ing 100 ft. each way, 
exclusive of the hexa- 
gonal towers, which are 
attached to the angles 
(Woodcut No. 421). The 
chamber of the tomb it- 
self is a hall 43 ft. square, 
with the angles cut off 
by pointed arches so as 
to form an. octagon, on 
which the dome rests. 

Around this square 
building is a gallery, 

20 ft. wide between the 
piers, enclosed on all 
sides by a screen of the 
most exquisite tracery 
in pierced stone -work 
with a projecting porch 
on each face (Woodcut No. 422).^ 

On comparing this with the tomb of Sher Sh&h at' 
Sahsar&m, which in many respects it resembles to a consider- 
able extept, it will be seen that it marks a considerable progress 
in tomb-building during even the short period that elapsed 
between the erection of the two. There is an inherent weakness 
in an octs^onal form as compared with the square, that even the 
Path&ns never quite successfully conquered ; and the outward 
screen of trellis work is far more .elegant than the open arcade 
of the Sahsar&m tomb. Something may be due to the fact that 
Gwiliar was a city where building of an ornamental character 
.had long been going on, and where consequently a superior 
school of masons and architects may always have existed, while 
Sahsarim was a remote country village, where these advantages 
were unknown. But be this as it may, the progress is such in 
so short a time, that we can only ascribe it to the invigorating 



‘ Muhammad Ghaus al 'Alam of pwd- 
liar, died in 1562. — Blochmann’s '’Ain-i- 
Akbari,* vol. 1. pp. 457f. 

^ The [dan is taken from one by Gen. 


Cunningham (‘ Report,’ vol. ii. platepi). 
He omits, however, these square projec- 
tions. I have added them from the 
photographs. 




a^s INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 

touch of Akbar’s genius, which was afterwards to work such 
wonders. 



422. Tomb of Muhammad Ghaus, Gwftliar. (From a Photograph.) 


One of the most remarkable and characteristic of Akbar’s 
buildings is the old or Red Palace in the Agra fort, so called 
from being constructed entirely of red sandstone, unfortunately 
not of very good quality, and consequently much of its ornament 
has peeled off. Though most probably erected by Akbar, it 
goes by the name of the JahAngtr Mahall, and lies on the south 
side of the Anguri B&gh and the KhSss Mahall or Palace which 
is probably lai^ely due to ShAh JahAn. The Red Palace is 
a square building, measuring 249 ft. by 260 ft. In the centre 
is a courtyard, 71 ft by 72 ft, on either side of which are two 
halls facing one another. The largest, 62 ft by 37 ft, has a 
flat ceiling of stone, divided info panels, and supported by 
struts of purely Hindu design, very similar to those qsed in 
the palaces of M^n Singh and Vikrama Shdhl at Gwfiliar. Every 





Chap. X. 


MUGHAL ARCHITECTURE. 


393 


feature around this court is indeed of pure Hindi! architecture. 
No arches appear anywhere, but the horizontal style of con* 
struction everywhere. The ornamentation, too, which is carved 
on all the flat surfaces, is of a class used by Akbar, but not 
found in the buildings of others. Indeed, throughout this 
palace arches are us^ so sparingly, and Hindi! forms and 
Hindi! construction prevail to such an extent, that it would 
ha^ly be out of place at Chitor or Gw&liar, though it still 
bears that impress of vigour and originality that he and he 
only knew how to impress on all his works.^ 

It is, however, at Fathpur-Stkrt, 22 ^ miles south-west from 
Agra, that Akbar must be judged of as a builder. During the 
whole of his reign it was his favourite residence. He apparently 
was the first to occupy the spot, and apparently the last, at 
least, to build there, no single building being identified as 
having been erected by any of his successors. 

Akbar seems to have had no settled plan when he com- 
menced building there. The original'part of the building seems 
to be the Mahall-t-Kh&ss, a block of building measuring about 
270 ft. by 390 ft and therefore of laiger dimensions than the 
Red Palace in the fort of Agra. It has two large courtyards, 
however, and the buildings that surround it are very inferior in 
richness of design and ornamentation. This, however, is far 
more than compensated for by the courts and pavilions that 
he added from time to time. There is the DIwdn-t-Khftss, or 
private audience-room, a square building with a throne con- 
sisting of an enormous flower-like bracket, supported on a 
richly-carved pillar;^ a peristylar building, call^ his office 
(Daftar-Kh&na), very similar to one he erected at Allahib&d, 
to be mentioned hereafter ; a five-storeyed open pavilion, all the 
pillars of which are most richly carved; and long colonnades and 
walls connecting these with one another. The richest, the most 
beautiful, as well as the most characteristic of all his buildings 
here are three small pavilions, said to have been erected to 
please and accommodate his three favourite sult&nas; hence 
called Blrbal’s daughter’s Mahall ; ^ Maryam-zam&nt’s House, 
appropriated to the daughter of Rija Bih&rt Mall and mother 
of Jahdngtr, which was known as SonahlS Makdn or “Golden 
House *’ as having been entirely gilt ; and the palace of the Rfimt 
or Turkish Sultina — Akbar’s first wife — Sult&na. Ruqayyah 
Begam, a daughter of Mtrz& Hindi), the emperor’s uncle : it is 

' There is a plan of this palace, in ^ Birbal was a favourite wit and court 
General Cunningham’s ‘Reports,’ vol. bard, but no mention is found of his 
i V. , plate 1 3 . having a daughter, and the house is usually 

* A cast of this throne is in the South spoken of simply as Btrbal’s palace. 
Kensington Museum. 



»94 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


miscalled by the guides Jodh-BflI’s.* They are small, but it is 
impossible to conceive anything so picturesque in outline, or 
any building carved and ornamented to such an extent, 
without the smallest approach to being overdone or in bad 



423. Carved Pillars in the SuUAna’s Kiosk, Fathpur-Slkrl. (From a Photograph.) 

taste. The two pillars shown in the annexed woodcut, are 
from a cast from the last-named pavilion, which is now in 
the South Kensington and other Museums. It is, periiaps, the 
most elaborate of the three; but the other two are generally 
in better taste. 

The glory, however, of Fathpur-Stkrt is its mosque, which 


^ Jodh-Bdi was the daughter of Udayasimha of Jodhpur and wife of Jahftngir. 





Chap. X. 


MUGHAL ARCHITECTURE 


295 


is hardly surpassed by any in India (Woodcut No. 484). It 
measures about 544 ft* **st and west, by 474 ft. north and 
south over all. The ^mosque itself, 288 ft. by 66 ft., is crowned 
by three domes. In its courtyard, which measures 359 ft. 10 in. 
by 438 ft. 9 in., stand two tombs : that of Saltm Chishtt, wholly 
in white marble, and the windows with pierced tracery of the 
most exquisite geometrical patterns — flowing tracery is a sub- 
sequent invention. It possesses besides a deep cornice of marble 
supported by brackets of the most elaborate design, so much 



434. Moique at Fathpur-Sllcrl. (From a Plan by Lieut. Cole, R.E.| 


SO indeed as to be almost fantastic — the only approach to bad 
taste in the place; the other tomb, that of Isl&m Khftn, is 
soberer and in excellent taste, but quite eclipsed by its 
surroundings.^ Even these parts, however, are surpassed in 
m^niflcence by the southern or Buland (“ Lofty ”) gateway (A),* 
measuring 130 ft. by 88 ft. in plan, and of proportionate 

* Shaikh IsUm KhAn was a grandson ^ The gateway B on the east side, is 
of Shaikh Saltm Chishtt and married a called the Badsnfihi or Royal gateway ; 
sister of Abfil • Fazl. Hr was made it is much smaller, though it faces the 
governor of Bei^l in and died in mosque. 

«6i3* 


396 INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 
dimensions in height (Woodcut No. 425). It was completed 



425. Buland or Southern Gateway ^Mosque, Fatbpur-Slkrl. (From a Photograph.) 




Chap. X. 


MUGHAL ARCHITECTURE. 


297 


in 1575. As it stands on a rising ground, when looked at 
from below, its appearance is noble beyond that of any portal 
attached to any mosque in India, perhaps in the whole world 
This gateway may also be quoted as a perfectly satisfactory 
solution of a problem which has exercised the ingenuity of 
architects in all ages, but was more successfully treated by the 
Saracenic architects tiban by any others. 

It was always manifest that to give a large building a door 
at all in proportion to its dimensions was, to say the least of 
it, very inconvenient. Men are only 6 ft high, and they do 
not want portals through which elephants might march. The 
Greeks never ventured, however, to reduce the proportionate 
size of their portals, though it may be th^ only opened the 
lower half, and they covered them, in almost all instances, 
with porticos to give them a dignity that even their dimensions 
failed to impart. 

The Gothic architects tried, by splaying their deeply- 
embowed doorways, and by ornamenting them richly with 
carving and sculpture, to give them the dignity that was 
indispensable for their situation without unnecessarily increasing 
the size of the openings. It was left, however, for the Saracenic 
architects completely to get over the difficulty. They placed 
their portals — one, or three, or five, of very moderate dimensions 
— at the back of a semi-dome. This last feature thus became 
the porch or portico, and its dimensions became those of the 
portal, wholly irrespective of the size of the opening. No one, 
for instance, looking at this gateway can mistake that it is a 
doorway and that only, and no one thinks of the size of the 
openings which are provided at its base. The semi-dome is 
the modulus of the design, and its scale that by which the 
imagination measures its magnificence. 

The same system pervade? almost all the portals of the 
age and style, and always with a perfectly satisfactory result — 
sometimes even more satisfactory -than in this instance, though 
it may be in less proportionate dimensions. The principle 
seems the best that has yet been hit upon, and, when that is 
right, failure is as difficult as it is to achieve success when the 
principle of the design is wrong. 

Taking it altogether, this palace at Fathpur-Sfkit is a romance 
in stone, such as few — very few — are to be found anywhere ; and 
it is a reflex of the mind of the great man who built it more 
distinct than can easily be obtained from any other source.^ 

^ The architecture of Fathpur-Sikrt has excellent architectural drawings, — pub- 
been admirablysurveyed and illustrated by lished by the Government of the North- 
the late Mr. Edmund W. Smith, — in four Western Provinces, Allahabad, 1894-97. 

** parts” or volumes, with over 4O0 plates Conf. G. Le Bon, *Les Monuments de 
and photographs, of which about 320 are ITnde,’ pp. 213-218, figs. 341-355. 



igS INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 

AUahAbftd was a more favourite residence of this monarch 
than Agra, perhaps as much so as even Fathpur-Stkr! ; but the 
English having appropriated the fort, its glories have been 
nearly obliterated. The most beautiful thing was the pavilion 
of the ChUlts SitOn, or forty pillars, so called from its having 
that number on the principal floor, disposed in two concentric 
octagonal ranges, one internal of sixteen pillars, the other out- 
side of twenty - four. Above this, supported by the inner 
colonnade, was an upper range of the same number of pillars 
crowned by a dome. This building has entirely disappeared, 
its materials being wanted to repair the fortifications. The great 
hall, however, still remains, represented in the annexed wo^cut 
(No. 426). It was turned into an arsenal ; a brick wall was run 



436. Hall ill Palace at AUahAbild. (From a Drawing by Daniell.) 


up between its outer colonnades with windows of English 
architecture, and its curious pavilions and other accompaniments 
removed ; and internally, whatever could not be conveniently 
cut away was carefully covered up with plaster and whitewash, 
and hid by stands of arms and deal fittings. Still its plan can 
be made out ; a square hall supported by eight rows of columns, 
eight in each row, thus making in all sixty-four, surrounded by 
a deep verandah of double columns, with groups of four at the 
angles, all surmounted by bracket capitals of the most elegant 
and richest design, and altogether as fine in style and as rich 
in ornament as anything in India. 

Perhaps, however, the most characteristic of AkbaPs build- 
ings is the tomb he commenced to erect for himself at Sikandara, 
alMUt 5 miles north-west from Agra, which is quite unlike 
any other tomb built in India either before or since, and of a 
design borrowed, as I believe, from a HindQ, or more correctly, 
Buddhist, model. It was completed in 1613, and is said to have 



Chap. X. 


MUGHAL ARCHITECTURE. 


*99 


been twenty years in building. It stands in an extrasive 
garden, approached by one noble gateway. In the centre of 
this garden, on a raised platform, stands the tomb itself, of a 
pyramidal form. The lower stor^ measures 320 ft. each way, 
exclusive of the angle towers. It is 30 ft. in height; and pierced 
by ten great arches on each face, and with a larger entrance 
adorned with a mosaic of marble in the centre (Woodcuts 
Nos. 427, 428y 



427. Plan of Akbar's Tomb at Sikandara. (From a Plan by the Author.) 
Scale 100 ft. to I in. 


On this terrace stands another far more ornate, measuring 
186 ft. on each side, and 14 ft 9 in. in height A third and 
fourth, of similar design, and respectively 15 ft. 2 in. and 14 ft 


^ No plan or section of this tomb has 
ever, so far as I know, been published, 
though it has l^en in our possenion for 
nearly a century. Those here given are 
from my own measurements, and, though 


they may be correct as far as they go, are 
not so detailed as those of such a monu- 
ment ought to be, and would have been, 
had it been in the hands of any other 
European nation. 



300 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


6 in. ^ high, stand on this, all these being of red sandstone. 
Within aiid above the last is a white marble enclosure 1 57 ft 
each way, or externally just half the length of the lowest terrace, 
its outer wall entirely composed of marble trellis-work of the 
most beautiful patterns. Inside it is surrounded by a colonnade 
or cloister of the same material, in the centre of which, on a 
rused platform, is the tombstone of the founder, a splendid 
piece of the most beautiful arabesque tracery. This, however, 



is not the true burial-place; but the mortal remains of this 
great king repose under a far plainer tombstone in a vaulted 
chamber in tihe basement 35 ft. square, exactly under the 
simulated tomb that adorns the summit of the mausoleum. 

At first sight it might appear that the design of this curious 
and exceptional tomb was either a caprice of the monarch who 
built it, or an importation from abroad (Woodcut No. 429). My 
impression, on the contrary, is, that it is a direct imitation of 
some such building as the old Buddhist vihtlras which may have 
existed, applied to other purposes in Akbar’s time. Turning 


‘ The diagram is probably sufficient to beigbt of the loner dome and upper angle 
explain tjM text, but must not be taken kin.sks, I had no means of measuringi 
as pretehdi^ to be a correct architectural and after all, I was merely making 
drawing. There were parts, such as the memoranda for my own satisfaction. 



Chap. X. 


MUGHAL ARCHITECTURE. 


301 



View of Akbar's Tomb, Sikandara. (From a Photograph.) 


302 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


back, for instance, to Woodcuts Nos. 89 and 193, representing 
the great rath at M&mallapuram, it will be seen that the number 
and proportion of the storeys is the same. The pavilions that 
adorn the upper storeys of Akbar’s tomb appear distinct remini- 
scences of th^ cells that stand on the edge of each platform of 
the rock-cut example. If the tomb had been crowned by a 
domi<^ chamber over the tombstone, the likeness would have 
been so great that no one could mistake it, and my conviction 
is that such a chamber was part of the original design. No 
such royal tomb remains exposed to the air in any Indian 
mausoleum ; and the raised platform in the centre of the upper 
cloister, 38 ft square, looks so like its foundation that I cannot 
help believing it was intended for that purpose. As the monu- 
ment now stands, the pyramid has a truncated and unmeaning 
aspect The total height of the building now is a little more 
than 100 ft. to the top of the angle pavilions ; and a central 
dome 30 or 40 ft. higher, which is the proportion that the base 
gives, seems just what is wanted to make this tomb as beautiful 
in outline and in proportion as it is in detail.^ Had it been so 
completed, it certainly would have ranked next the T&j among 
Indian mausolea.** 


JaiiAngIr, A.D. 1605-1628. 

When we consider how much was done by his father and 
his son, it is rather startling to find how little Jah&ngtr con- 
tributed to the architectural magnificence of India Partly this 
ma^ be owii^ to his not having the same passion for building 
whidi characterised these two great monarchs ; but partly also 
to his having made lAhor the cajutal during his reign, and 
to his having held his court there in preference to Agra or 
Delhi, from 1622 till his death in 1628.* 

Among the buildings of Jah^bigtP.s reign, the Jah&ngtri 
Mahall, already mentioned, in the fort at Agra, is ascribed to 


> Eleven plates of the beautilhl eolouied 
work are. published in * Fhotogtaphs and 
Drawings of HistoricalBoildings* (Griggs, 
tSj6). 

* After the above was written, and 
the diagram drawn (Woodcut No. 4e8j; 
I was not a little pleased to find the 
following entfy in Mr. Finch's jdumal. 
He resiM in Am for some year^ and 
visited the tomb for the last , time 
apparently in 1609, and after desctilnng 
inost foitnfolly all its peculiarities up to 
the uplfor flobr, as it now stands, adds ; 
* At my last Uiereof there was mily 
ovmdiead a rich tent with a Semaine over 


the tomb. But it is to be inarched over 
with the most curious white and speckled 
marble, and to be seeled all within with 
pure sheet gold richly inwrought." — 
* Purchas, his Pilgrims,’ vcd. i. p. 440. 

. * His fother, Ahbar, had also kept his 
court here for fourteen years, from 1584 
to 1598 : and had repaired the fort and 
built the Akbari Mahall in the east end 
of it, and a Dtwin - i - 'Amm, now de- 
molishedi also the Akbari Gate as the 
principal entrance. Examples may still 
pe seen at lAhor of the arddtecture of 
his time, thoo(^ deftioed by subsequent 
idteraStoDSt 











304 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


1620,^ the Sh&limir gardens and summer houses near .Sitnagar 
were built about 1624; the tomb of An&rkalt in the town of 
LIdior; and in the fort he added to Akbar’s buildings the 
eastern Khw&b>gah, marked in the accompanying plan (Wood- 
cut No. 430) and the Mott Masjid of white marble, with three 
domes, whfch, though comparatively plain, is architecturally 
interesting. The Khw4b-gah or sleeping apartments were in 
a quadrangle about 140 ft. in length, with a lofty pavilion in the 
middle of the north side — then overlooking the R&vt — and at the 
comers two chambers with HindQ pillars richly carved. On the 
other three sides the area was surrounded by a colonnade, on 
pillars of red sandstone with bracket capitals carved with figures 
of elephants, peacocks, and conventional animals, similar to what 
we find in the Red Palace at Agra. But these and nearly all 
the buildings in the fort have met with no respect, but have 
been entirely altered to suit the conveniences of military life. 

To the south of Jah&ngir’s palace Shih Jah&n erected his 
Dlw&n-i-’Amm, and on the west an extension of the palace, the 
smaller Khw&b-gah in which is an elegant pavilion of marble 
arches and open lattice work which long did duty as a garrison 
church. At the west end of the north front of the fort is what 
is known as the Samman Burj,’ containing the Shish Mahall — 
the work of Sh&h Jah&n and Aurangztb, added to by the Sikhs, 
and the'Naulakh^ pavilion a costly erection inlaid in pietra 
dura with flowers in precious stones. The square on the west of 
the fort, called the Hazuri B&gh, enclosing the Birahdarl of 
Ranjit Singh, gives entrance to the Badshilhi Masjid erected 
by Aurangztb in 1674, to which reference will be made below. 

The great mosque in the city of Lihor is that of Waztr 
Kh&n built in 1634 by Hakim ’AlImu-d-DIn, SfibahdAr of the 
Panjflb under Sh&h Jah&n. It is in the Persian style, covered 
with enamelled tiles, and resplendent in colours, but not very 
graceful in form. Its brick walls are covered with beautiful 
inlaid wotk called kashi^ a kind of mosaic of glazed pottery.* 

Jah&ngir’s own tomb at Sh&hdara, about 6 miles north 
of L&hor, was raised by his queen, the accomplished and 
imperious Ndr-Jah4n, and was worthy of his other buildings, 
but it has suffered as much as , the others. The tomb is in 
the middle of a large walled garden about 540 yards square, 
extending to 60 acres, originally with gateways on each side — 

^ Photographed in Cole’s * Buildings in tower here, 
the Panjab,” plates i and 2. * This inlaid work is described by 

^ From a native plan of the Fort in the J. L. Kipling, with a coloured view 
time of Ranjit Singh. — Cole, u/ sup, of the fine gateway and some details, 

* Samman is from musamman octa- in * Journal <» Indian Art and Industry,’ 
gonal Tradition reports alofty octagonal vol, ii. p* 17, and plates 16-18. 









GOPURA AT PREA KHANE (PRAH-KHAN). THE SPEAN TAON NAGA-HEAD 

(Froiil Tissandier’s ‘Cambodge et Java.’) (From Tissandier’s ‘Cambodge et Java’) 






CORRIDOR OF TEMPLE AT PRAH-KHAN 
From Tissandier’s ‘Cambodge et Java’ 









CHANDI ARJUNA CHANDI BHIMA 





BAS-RELIEFS FROM BORO-BUDUR 




CHANDI JABANG 






Chap. X. 


MUGHAL ARCHITECTURE. 


305 


that from the court of the Sari’e on the west having a marble 
arch and being about 50 ft. high. The mausoleum in the 
centre stands on a low plinth, 256 ft. square, and itself consists 
of a terraced platform, 209 ft. square and about 20^ ft. h^h, 
with octagonal minarets of three storeys above the terraced 
roof, surmounted by white marble cupolas, and rising 85 ft. from 
the plinth. It is surrounded by arcades, having a central arch 
flanked by a doorway and five other arches on each side ; the 
arcades have behind them forty rooms in all, through one of 
which on each side, a passage leads through other two oblong 
apartments into the tomb chamber, which is thus enclosed in 
nearly solid walls of masonry 56 ft. thick on all sides. The 
sarcophagus is of white marble, inlaid with pietra dura work 
and .stands in an octagonal chamber of 26^ ft. diameter and 
about 21 ft. high. On the roof over this is a raised platform 
53 ft. square with a tessellated marble pavement, the marble 
parapet of which was carried oif by Ranjit Singh, but has now 
been restored.^ The building is of red sandstone inlaid with 
marble, and the details are all in excellent taste, but the long 
low facade between the minirs is. not architecturally very 
effective. 

On the west of this is the Sar&’e, and beyond it the octagonal 
tomb of Asaf Khin, the brother of NAr-Jah&n, who died in 1641, 
and across the railway is that of the queen herself— both stripped 
by Ranjit Singh of their marbles and inlaid work.* 

At the other end of his dominions also he built a splendid 
new capital at Dacca, in supersession to Gaur, and adorned it 
with several buildings of considerable dimensions. These, 
however,, were principally in brick-work, covered with stucco, 
and with only pillars and brackets in stone. Most of them, 
consequently, are in a state of ruinous decay; marvellously 
picturesque, it must be confessed, peering through the luxuriant 
vegetation that is tearing them to pieces but hardly worthy 
to be placed in competition with the stone and marble buildings 
of the more northern capitals. 

There is one building — the tomb known as that of Ttimidu- 
d-daulah — at Agra, however, which belongs to this ragn, and 
though not erected by the monarch himself, cannot be passed 
over, not only from its own beauty of design, but also bwause 
it marks an epoch in the style to which it belongs. It was 
erected by Nfir-Jah&n, in memory of her father, who died in 

> There is a plan of the tomb and with coloured details (plates 69-76) are 
garden, but to a very small scale, among to adequate scales however. 

Major Cole’s plates in Griggs' ‘ Photo- • Thornton’s^ * Lahore ’ and Sjrad 
graphs and l)rawings of Historical Build- Muhammad LatiTs ‘ Lahore ’ give detailed 
ings,’ plate 68. The elevation and section accounts of the place. 



INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


306 

1621, and was completed in 1628. It is situated on the left 
bank of the river, in the midst of a garden surrounded by a 
wall measuring 540 ft. on each side. In the centre of this, 
on a raised platform, stands the tomb itself, a square measuring 

ft. on each side. It is two storeys in height, and at each 
angle is an octagonal tower, surmounted by an open pavilion. 
The towers, however, are rather squat in proportion, and the 
general design of the building very far from being so pleasing 
as that of many less pretentious tombs in the neighbourhood. 
Had it, indeed, been built in red sandstone, or even with an 
inlay of white marble like that of Hum&yfin, it would not 
have attracted much attention. Its real merit consists in being 
wholly in white marble, and being covered throughout with a 
mosaic in “ pietra dura " — ^the drst, apparently, and certainly one 
of the most splendid, examples of that class of ornamentation 
in India.^ 

It seems that in the early part of the 17th century Italian 
artists, principally, apparently from Florence, were introduced 
into India, and, it has been skid they taught the Indians the 
art of inlaying marble with precious stones.^ At Fathpur- 
Stkit, examples occur of “ inlay '* as well as of “ overlay,” and 
in the gateway of the Sikandara tomb inlaid work is quite 
prevalent ; bul in the time of Shfth Jah&n it became the lead- 


^ For details, of the decoration, E. 
W. Smith's * Mogfhul Colour Decoration 
of Agra,' pp. itPio,* and plates 64-77 ; 
'Photographs and Drawings of Indian 
Buildings,' plates 12-30; or 'Journal of 
Indian Art and Industiy,’ vol. vi. pp. 
90-94, and plates 59-66. 

* Although this was for a time hardly 
doubted, no vtry direct evidence was 
adduced to prove that it was to foreign — 
Florentine— artists that the Indians owe 
the art of inlaying in predousstones gener- 
ally known as work in " pietra dura.” 
Austin or Augustin de Bordeaux is the 
only European artist whosft name can be 
identified with any works of the class. 
He was employed by Shitti Jahftn at 
Delhi, and is supposed to have executed 
that mosaic of Orpheus or Apollo playing 
to the beasts, alter Raphael’s picture, 
which adorned the throne there, and was 
long In the Indian Museum at South 
Kensinffton, but was taken back and 
vestmd to its place by Lord Cunon. 

In ^The Nineteenth Cantuiy and 
After,’ vd» iii. (1903) pp^ 10390. Mr. 
E. & Mavell,. of the Oucutta School of 
Art, has shown reason lor ascribinff this 
blaid work to Arab and Fenian ongtns, 


pointing to the "elaborate scrolls of con- 
ventional Arabian design,” and the 
familiar Persian "such as rose- 

water vessels, the cypress,” etc.,* which 
characterise the art. 

Up to the erection of the gates to 
Akbar's tomb at Sikandara in the first 
ten years of Jahftngtr’s reign, a.d. 1605- 
1615, we have infinite mosaics of coloured 
marble, but few specimens of "inlay.” 
In I'timftdu-d-daulah’s tomb, a.d. 1615- 
1628, we have both systems in great 
perfection. In the Tftj and palaces at 
Agra and Delhi, built .by Shth Jahfin, 
A.D. 1628 - 1668, the mosaic hu dis- 
appeared, being supplanted by the 
"inlay.” It was just before that time 
that the system of inlaying called " pietra 
dura” was invented, and became the rage 
at Florence and, in fact, all throughout 
Europe ; but though during the remns of 
the two last-named monarchs mlian 
artists were in their service, there is no 
definite evidence that thi^ held influential 
posts, whilst artists from Shirfiz, Bfigfadfid, 
Samarkand and Kanauj are mentioned as 
of high reputation during the erection of 
the Tfti Mahall,— most probably designed 
by 'An Mardan Khfin, a Persian ref^^ee. 



Chap. X. 


MUGHAL ARCHITECTURE. 


307 


ing characteristic of the style, and both -his palaces and his 
tombs owe their principal distinction to the beauty of the 
mode in which this new invention was employed. 

It has been doubted whether this new art was really a 
foreign introduction, or whether it had not been invented by 
the natives of India themselves. The question never, probably, 
would have arisen had one of the fundamental principles of 
architecture been better understood. When we, for instance, 
having no art of our own, copy a Grecian or Roman pillar, 
or an Italian . mediaeval arch in detail, we do so literally, 
without any attempt to adapt it to our uses or climate; but 
when a people having a style of their own wish to adopt 
any feature or process belonging to any other style, they do 
not copy but adapt it to their uses ; and it is this distinction 
between adopting and adapting that makes all the difference. 
We would have allowed Italians to introduce with their mosaics 
all the details of their Cinque-cento architecture. The Indians 
set about reproducing, with the new materials and processes — 
wherever they came from — the patterns which the architects 
of Akbar had been in the habit of carving in stone or of 
inlaying in marble. Every form was adapted to the place 
where it was to be used. The style remained the same, so 
did all the details; the materials only were changed, and the 
patterns only so far as was necessary to adapt them to the 
smaller and more refined materials that were to be used.^ 

As one of the first, the tomb of rtim&du-d-daulah was certainly 
one of the least successful specimens of its class. The patterns 
do not quite fit the places where they are put, and the spaces 
are not always those best suited for this style of decoration. 
But, on 'the other hand, the beautiful tracery of the pierced 
marble slabs of its windows, which resemble those of Salim 
Chishtt’s tomb at Fathpur - SIkrI, the beauty of its white 
marble walls, and the rich colour of its decorations, make up 
so beautiful a whole, that it is only on comparing it with the 
works of Sh&h Jah&n that we are justified in finding fault. 

ShAh JahAn, A.D. 1628-1658. 

It would be difficult to point out in the whole history of 
architecture any change so sudden as that which took place 
between the style of Akbar and that of his grandson Sh&h 
Jah&n — nor any contrast so great as that between the numly 

^ Something of the ssine sort occurred without copying. Fide * History of 
when the Turks occupied Constantinople Ancient and Medieval Architecture/ 
They adapted the architecture of the 3rd ed. vdL ii. pp. 557 et rayy. 

Christians to their own purposes, but 



3o8 INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 

vigour an4 exuberant originality of the first, as compared with 
the extreme but almost effeminate elegance of the second. 
Certainly when the same people, following the same religion, 
built temples and palaces in the same locality, nothing of the sort 
ever occurred in any country whose history is now known to us. 

Nowhere is the contrast between the two styles more strongly 
marked than in the palace of Agra — from the red stone palace 
of Akbar or Jahflnglr, with its rich sculptures and square HindQ 
construction, a door opens into the white marble court of the 
haram of Sh8h Jahfln (1638-1648), with all its feeble prettiness, 
but at the same time marked with that peculiar elegance which 
is found only in the East The court is not large, 170 ft. by 
235 ft., but the whole is finished with the most elaborate care. 
Three sides of this are occupied by the residences of the ladies, 
not remarkable for size, nor, in their present state, for archi- 
tectural beauty: but the fourth, overhanging the river, is 
occupied by three white marble pavilions of singular elegance. 

As in most Moorish palaces, the baths on one side of this 
court were the most elegant and elaborately decorated apart- 
ments in the palace. The baths have been destroyed, but the 
walls and roofs still show the elegance with which they were 
adorned.^ 

Behind thi^,' in the centre of the palace, is a great court, 
500 ft. by 370 ft., surrounded \>y arcades, and approached at 
the opposiie'ends through a succession of beautiful courts open- 
ing into one andther by gateways of great magnificence. On 
one side of this -court is the great hall of the palace-— the 
Dtw4n-i-’Amm — 208 ft. by 76 ft., supported by three ranges 
of arcades of exquisite beauty. It is open on three sides, and 
with a niche for the throne at the back.^ Behind it are two 
smaller courts, the one containing the Diw4n-i-Kh&ss, or private 
hall of audience, the other the haram. The hall in the. former 
is one of the most elegant of Sh4h Jahin’s buildings, being 
wholly of white marble inlaid with coloured stones, and the 
design of the whole being in the best style of his reign. It 
consists of an open colonnade and an inclosed room behind, 
and measures 65 ft. in length by 34 ft. and 22 ft high. The 
carving is beautiful, and the flowers inlaid in the white marble 
with red camelian and others are of fine effect 

^ The great bath was torn up by the fetched probably x per cent of id 
Marquis of Hastings with the intention original cost ; but it helped to eke out 
of presenting it to George IV., an in- the revenues of India in a manner most 
tention apparently never carried out ; but congenial to the spirit of its governors, 
it is difficult to ascertain the facts now, ‘ Both care and money are now 
as the whole of the marble flooring with expended liberally for the protection and 
what remained of the bath was sold by maintenance of such old buildings that 
auction by Lord William Bentinck, and remain in the province. 



Chap. X. 


MUGHAL ARCHITECTURE. 


309 


One of the most picturesque features about this palace is 
a marble pavilion, in two storeys, that surmounts one of the 
circular bastions on the river face, between the haram and the 
Dlw&n - i • KhSss. It looks of an earlier style than that of 
Sh&h Jahdn, and if Jah&ngfr built anything here it is this. 
On a smaller scale, it occupies the same place here that the 
Challs Sitfln did in the palace at Allah&bcld ; and exemplifies, 
even more than in their larger buildings, the extreme elegance 
and refinement of those who designed these palaces.* 

Palace at Delhi. 

Though the palace at Agra is perhaps more picturesque, and 
historically certainly more interesting, than that of Delhi, the 
latter had the immense advantage of being built at once, on one 
uniform plan, and by the most magnificent, as a builder, of all 
the sovereigns of India. It had, however, one little disadvantage, 
in being somewhat later than Agra. All Sh&h Jahdn’s buildings 
there seem to have been finished before he commenced the 
erection of the new city of Sh 4 h Jah&n&bid with its palace, and 
what he built at Agra is soberer, and in somewhat better taste 
than at Delhi. Notwithstanding these defects, the palace at 
Delhi is, or rather was, the most magnificent palace in the East 
— perhaps in the world — and the only one, at least in India, 
which enables us to understand what the arrangements of a com- 
plete palace were when deliberately undertaken and carried out 
on one uniform plan (Woodcut No. 431). 

The palace at Delhi, which is situated like that at Agra 
close to the edge of the JamnS, is a nearly regular parallelogram, 
with the angles slightly canted off, and measures 1600 ft. east 
and west, by 3200 ft. north and south, exclusive of the gateways. 
It is surrounded on all sides by a very noble wall of red sand- 
stone, relieved at intervals by towers surmounted by kiosks. 
The principal entrance or Lihor Gate (I) on the west faces the 
Ch&ndni Chauk, a noble wide street, nearly a mile long, planted 
with two rows of trees, and with a stream of water running 
down its centre. Entering within its deeply-recessed portal, you 
find yourself beneath the vaulted hall (K), the sides of which 
are in two storeys, and with an octagonal break in the centre. 
This hall, which is 375 ft. in length over all, has very much the 
effect of the nave of a gigantic Gothic cathedral, and forms the 
noblest entrance known to belong to any existing palace. At its 

‘ Perfect plans of this palace exist in ' Handbook of A^ra,’ though useful as 
the War Department of India. Without far as it goes, is on too small a scale and 
such plans it is very difficult to make anv not sufficiently detailed for purposes of 
description intelligible. That in Keeners architectural illustration. 



310 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


inner end this hall opened into a courtyard, 350 ft. square, from 
the centre of which a noble biz&r (F, G) extended right and left, 
likeihe hall, two storeys in height, but not vaulted. One of these 



Palace at Delhi. (From a native Plan in the possession of the Author.) 


led to the Delhi gate (H) on the south, the other, which I believe 
was never quite finished, to the garden. In front, at the entrance, 
was the Nautet KhAna (A), or music hall, beneath which 







Chap. X. 


MUGHAL ARCHITECTURE. 


31X 

the visitor entered the second or great court of the palace, 
measuring 550 ft. north and south, by 385 ft. east and west In 
the centre of this stood the Dtw&nd*’Amm (B), or great audience 
hall of the palace, very similar in design to that of Agra, but 
more ms^ificent Its dimensions are about 200 ft. by 100 ft 
over all. In its centre is a highly ornamental niche, in which, 
on a platform of marble richly inlaid with precious stones,* and 
directly facing the entrance, once stood the celebrated peacock 
throne, the most gorgeous example of its class that perhaps 
even the East could ever boast of.* Behind this again was a 
garden-court ; on its eastern side was the Rang Mahall (C), or 
painted hall, containing a bath and other apartments. 

This range of buildings, extendii^ 1600 ft. east and west, 
divided the palace into two nearly equal halves. In the northern 
division of it were a series of small courts, surrounded by build- 
ings apparently appropriated to the use of distinguished guests ; 
and in one of them overhanging the .river stood the celebrated 
Dtwin-i-Kh&ss (D), or private audience hall — if not the inost 
beautiful, certainly the most highly ornamented of all Sh&h 
Jah^n’s buildings.* It is larger, certainly, and far richer in 
ornament than that at Agra, though hardly so eluant in design ; 
but nothing can exceed the beauty of the inlay of precious 
stones with which it is adorned, or the general poetry of the 
design. It is round the roof of this hall that the famous 
inscription runs : If there is a heaven on earth, it is this, it is 
this,” which may safely be rendered into the sober English 
assertion, that no palace now existing in the world possesses an 
apartment of such singular elegance as this. 

Beyond this to the northward were the gardens of the 
palace, laid out in the usual formal style of the East, but 
adorned with fountains and little pavilions and kiosks of white 
marble, that render these so beautiful and so appropriate to such 
a climate. 

* When we took possession of the that a(;ain was a copy of a jncture in the 
palace every one seems to have looted Catacombs. There Orphens is playing 
after the most independent ftuhion. on a lyre, in Raphael’s picture on a violin. 
Among others, a Captain (afterwards and ^t is the instrument reinesented 
Sir John) Jones tore up a great part of in the Delhi mosi^. Evm if other 
this platform, but had the happy idea to evidence were wanting, this would be 

¥ !t his loot set in marble as table tops, sufficient to set the question at rest. Jt 
wo of these he brought home and certainly was not put there by the Ugot 
sold to the Government for £$ 00 , and Aurangzib. 

placed in the India Museum. No * It was broken up and carried off by 
one can doubt that the one with the Ntdir ShAh in 1739. 
birds was executed by Florentine, or at * South of this and between it and the 
least Italian artists; while the other, Rai^ Mahall is tlw Sa mm a n -bari, pro- 

ali;eady mendoned, which was apparently jeedng from Ae line of the walu. At 
at the back of the platform, Is a bad thenorth end isthe Shfth Buij and at the 
c(^ from Rardiael's picture of Orpheus sooth the Asld Boij. 
charming the beasts. As is well known. 



313 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


The whole of the area between the central range of buildings 
to the south, and eastward from the bftz&r, measuring about 
1000. ft each way, was occupied by the haram and private 
apartments of thh palace, covering, consequently, more than 
twice the area of the Escurial, or, in fact, of any palace in 
Europe. According to the native plan I possess, which I see 
no reason for distrusting, it contained three garden courts, and 
some thirteen or fourteen other courts, arranged some for state, 
some for convenience; but what they were like we have no 
means of knowing. Not one vestige of them now remains. 
Judging from the corresponding parts of the palace at Agra, 
built by the same monarch, they must have vied with the public 
apartments in richness and in beauty when originally erected, 
but having continued to be used as an abode down to the time 
of the mutiny, they were probably veiy much disfigured and 
debased. Taste was, no doubt, at as low an ebb inside the 
walls of the palace during the last hundred years as it was out- 
side, or as we find it at Lucknow and elsewhere ; but all the 
essential parts of the structure were there, and could easily have 
been disencumbei^ from the accretions that had been heaped 
upon it The idea, however, of doing this was far from entering 
into the heads of our governors. The whole of the haram courts 
of the palace were swept off the face of the earth to make 'way 
for a hideous British barrack, without those who carried out this 
fearful piecid of Vandalism, thinking it even worth while to 
make a plan of what they were destroying or preserving any 
record of the most splendid palace in the world. 

Of the public parts of the palace all that now remains is the 
entrance hall, the Naubat Kh&na, the Dtw&n-i-’Amm and 
Khftss, and the Rang Mahall — long used as a mess-room — and 
one or two small pavilions. They are the gems of the palace, 
it is true, but without the courts and corridors connecting them 
they lose all their meaning and more than half their l^uty.^ 
Situated in the middle of a British barrack-yard, they look like 
precious stones torn from their settings in some exquisite piece 
of Oriental jeweller’s work and set at random in a bed of the 
commonest plaster.* 

_ * It ou^t in birness to be added that, ing 'a single building of Shfth JahAn’s 
since thev have been in our possession, there was ample space within the walls 
considerable sums have been expended for all the stores and materiel of the 
on the repair of these fraraents. tmison of Delhi, and in the palace and 

* The excuse for this mlibeiate act of Saltmgarh ample space for a garrison, 
Vandalism^ was, of course, the military more than doubly ample to man their 
one, that it was necessary to place the walls in the event of an Anente. There 
garrison of Delhi in security in the event was ample space for larger and better 
of any sadden emergency. Had it been ventilated barracks just outside die 
correct it would have been a valid one, palace walls, for the test of Ihe garrison, 
but this is not the case. Without touch- who could easily have gained the shelter 



Chap. X. 


TAJ MAHALL. 


313 


TAj Mahall. 

It is a pleasure to turn from this destroyed and desecrated 
palace to the T&j Mahall, which even more, perhaps, than the 
palace, was always the chef-d’oeuvre - of Shih Jw&n’s reign 
(Woodcut No. 432). It, too, has been fortunate in attracting Ae 
attention of the English,' who have paid sedulous attention to it 
for some time past, and keep it now, with its gardens, in a 
perfect state of substantial repair. 

No building in India has been so often drawn and photo- 
graphed as this, or more frequently described ; but, with all this, 
it is almost impossible to convey an idea of it to those who 
have not seen it, not only because of its extreme delicacy, and 
beauty of material employed in its construction, but from' the 
complexity of its design. If the Tclj were only the tomb itself, 
it might be described, but the platform on which it stands, with 
its tall minarets, is a work of art in itself. Beyond this are the 
two wings, one of which is a mosque, which anywhere else would 
be considered an important building. This group of buildings 
forms one side of a garden court 880 ft. square ; and beyond this 
again an outer court, of the same width but only half the depth. 
This is entered by three gateways of its own, and contains in the 
centre of its inner wall the great gateway of the garden court, 
a worthy pendant to the T&j itself.^ Beautiful as it is in 
itself, the T&j would lose half its charm if it stood alone. 
It is the combination of so many beauties, and the perfect 
manner in which each is subordinated to the other, that makes 
up a whole which the world cannot match, and which never 
fails to impress even those who are most indifferent to the 
effects produced by architectural objects in general. 

The plan and section (Woodcuts Nos. 433, 434) explain suffi- 
ciently the general arrangement and structural peculiarities of the 
tomb or principal building of the group. The raised platform 
on which it stands is 18 ft. high, faced with white marble, and 
exactly. 313 ft. square. At each comer of this terrace stands a 
minaret 133 ft in height, and of the most exquisite proportions, 
more beautiful, perhaps, than any other in India. In the centre 
of this marble platform stands the mausoleum, a square of 186 
ft, with the comets cut off to the extent of 33 ft. 9 in., the fa^de 
rising 92 ft 3 in. from the platform. The centre of this is 


of the palace walls in the event of any 
sudden rising of the citizens. 

The engineers, it would seem, per- 
ceived that Vy gutting the palace th^ 
could provide at no trouble or expense a 
wall round their barrack-yard, and for 


this or some such wretched motive of 
economy the palace was sacrificed ! 

^ A plan of this garden, with the TiU. 
and ail the surrounding buildings, will 
be found in the ‘Journal of the Royal 
Asiatic Society,* vol. vii. p. 42. 



3*4 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE, Book VII. 



43*- View of 'fAj Mahall. (From a Photograph.) 




434 . 


Section of T&j Mahall, Agra. Scale no ft, to i in. 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


316 

occupi^ by the principal dome, 58 ft in diameter and rising 74 
ft. above the roof or 19 1 from the platform, under which is an 
enclosure formed by a screen of trellis-work of white marble, a 
chef-d’oeuvre of elegance in Indian art^ Within this stand Ae 
tombs — ^that of Arjumand BAno Begam, styled Mumt^ Mahall, 
in the centre, and that of her husband Shih Jah&n on one side. 
These, however, as is usual in Indian supulchres, are not the true 
tombs — the bodies rest in a vault, level with the surface of the 
ground (as seen in the section) beneath plainer tombstones, 
placed exactly underneath those in the hall above. 

In every angle of the building is a small domical apartment 
of two storeys in height, 26 ft 8 in. in diameter, and these are 
connected, as shoVm in the plan, by various passages and halls. 

The light to the central apartment is admitted only through 
double screens of white marble trellis -work of the most 
exquisite design, one on the outer, and one on the inner face of 
the wdls. In our climate this would produce nearly complete 
darkness ; but in India, and in a building wholly composed of 
white marble, this was required to temper the glare that other- 
wise would have been intolerable. As it is, no words can 
express the chastened beauty of that central chamber, seen in 
the soft gloom of the subdued light that reaches it through the 
distant and half-closed openings that surround it. When used 
as a B&rahdfri, or pleasure palace, it must always have been 
the coolest and- loveliest of garden retreats, and now that it is 
sacred to the- dead it is the most graceful and the most impressive 
of the sepulchres of the world. 

This building, too, is an exquisite example of that system 
of inlaying with precious stones which became the great 
characteristic of the style of the Mughals after the death of 
Akbar. All the spandrils of the T&j, all the angles and more 
iinMi:tent architectural details, are heightened by being inlaid 
wiui precious stones, such as ^ates, bloodstones, jaspers, and 
the lim These are combined in wreaths, scrolls, and frets, as 
exquisite in design as beautiful in colour ; and, relieved by the 
pure white marble in whicit^they are inlaid, they form the most 
beautiful and precious style of ornament ever adopted in 
architecture; though, of course, not to be compared with the 
intellectual beauty of Greek ornament, it certainly stands first 

> Fran its design I cannot help fimcv- was originally surrounded a screen of 
this screen was erected after Shfth gold, studded with gems. The apartment 

E death. It is not mentioned in md two silver doors, said to Imve cost 
sacoeant ('Travels,’ Constable’s 127,000 rupees, whidi were carried off 
ed. m,n98). It oertiinly looks more end meltea by Sdisjmall’s JAts when 
mod&ii, and is reported to be so. It is they sacked Agra in 1761. 
said that the sarcophagus of the empress 



Chap. X. MOTI MASJID, AGRA. 


3*7 


among the purely decorative forms of architectural design. 
This mode of ornamentation is lavishly bestowed on the tomte 
themselves and the screen that surrounds them, though 
sparingly introduced on the mosque that stands to the west of 
the Tij, or on the fountains and surrounding buildings. The 
judgment, indeed, with which this style of ornament is 
apportioned to the various parts is almost as remarkable as the 
ornament itself, and conveys a high idea of the taste and atfill 
of the Indian architects of that age. 

The long rows of cypresses, which line the marble paths that 
intersect the garden at right angles, and are backed up by 
masses of eveigreen foli^, lend a charm to the whole which 
the founder and his children could hardly have realised. Each 
of the main avenues among these trees has a canal along its 
centre studded with marble fountains, and each vista leads to 


some beautiful architectural object. With the Jamn& in front, 
and this garden with its fountains and gateway behind ; with 
its own purity of material and grace* of form, the T4j may 
challenge comparison with any - 
creation of the same sort in the 
whole world. Its beauty may 
not be of the highest class, but 
in its class it is unsurpassed. 

Though neither so magni- 
ficent nor so richly ornamented 
as some of his other build- 
ings, the Mott Masjid or Pearl 
Mosque, which Sh 4 h Jah 4 n 
erected in the fort of Agra, 

1646-1653, is one of the purest 
and most elegant buildings of 
its class to be found anywhere 
(Woodcut No. 435). It is not 
large, measuring only 187 ft. 
by 234 ft over all externally ; 
and though raised on a lofty 
stylobate, which ought to give 



it dignity, it makes no- pre- 
tensions to architectural effect 
on the outside; but the moment 


43c. Plan of Moti Masjid. 

(From a Plan by Gen. Cunningham.) 
Scale zoo ft. to z in. 


you enter by the eastern gateway the effect of its cdurtyard is 
surpassingly beautiful. The whole is of udiite marble, and the 
forms all graceful and elegant. The only ornament introduced 
which is not strictly architectural, is an inscription in black 
marble, inlaid in the frieze of the mosque itself. The courtyard 
is nearly a square, 154 ft. by 158 ft. On three sides it is sur- 





INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


3*8 

rounded by a low colonnade lo ft. lo in. deep ; but on the west, 
by the mosque itself, 159 ft. by 56 ft. internally, which was 
accessible at both ends from the private apartments of the 
palace. It opens on the court by seven arches of great beauty, 
and is surmounted by three domes of the bulbous form that 
became universal about this time (Woodcut No. 436). The 



436. View in Courtyard of Mott Masjid, Agra. (From a Photograph.) 


woodcut cannot do it justice, it must be seen to be appreciated ; 
but I hardly know, anywhere, of a building so perfectly pure and 
elegant, or one that forms such a wonderful contrast with the 
buildings of Akbar in the same place. 

The Jimi’ Masjid at Delhi begun in 1644 but not finally 
completed till 1658, is not unlike the Mott Masjid in plan, 
though built on a very much larger scale, and adorned with 
two noble minarets, which are wanting in the Agra example ; 
while from the somewhat capricious admixture of red sandstone 
with white marble, it is far from possessing the same el^ance 
and purity of effect. It is, however, one of the few mosques, 
either in India or elsewhere, that is designed to produce a 
pleasing effect externally. As will be seen from the woodcut 
(Na 437), it is raised on a lofty basement, and its three gate- 
ways, combined with the four angle towers and the frontispiece 






437. Great Mosque at Delhi from the N.E. .(From a Sketch Iqr the Author.) 




3*0 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


and domes of the mosque itself, make up a design where all the 
parts are pleasingly subordinated to one another, but at the 
same time produce a whole of great variety and el^ance. The 
mosque itself is 201 ft in length by 120 ft., and is flanked by two 
minars ft. high, formed in alternate vertical stripes of sand- 
stone and white marble, and crowned by light marble pavilions. 
Its principal gateway cannot be compared with that at Fathpur 
Stkrt (Woodcut No. 425) ; but it is a noble portal, and from its 
smaller dimensions more in harmony with the objects by which 
it is surrounded. 

It is not a little singular, looking at the magnificent mosque 
which Akbar built in his palace at Fathpur Stkrl, and the 
Mott Masjid, with .which Sh&h Jahin adorned the palace at 
Agra, that he should have provided no place of worship in his 
palace at Delhi. The little Mott mosque that is now found there 
was added by Aurangztb, and, though pretty enough in itself, is 
very small, only 60 ft. square over all, and utterly unworthy of 
such a palace. There is no place of prayer, within the palace 
walls, of the time of Sh&h Jah&n, nor, apparently, any intention 
of providing ope. The J &mi' Masjid was so near,and so apparently 
part of the same design, that it seems to have been considered 
sufficient to supply this apparently anomalous deficiehcy. It 
stands in the market place facing the Delhi gate of the fort on a 
platform about lift, high, reached by steps in front and on the 
south side, but the great gateway in front was pulled down by 
the British during the Mutiny. It occupies but a small area — 
130 ft. 100 ft. — and has five entrances. Its three domes, 
without necks, are a sort of compromise between the earlier flat 
dome and the tall form, subsequently introduced. They are of 
red sandstone with zigzag bands of white marble circling round 
them, not without teauty, if appropriate to the building on 
lyhich they are placed. The mosque was built for, or in honour 
of, Jah&n Ar& Begam, the noble and accomplished daughter 
of Sh&h Jah&n, in 1644-48. 

AurangzIb, ok ’AlamgIr, a.d. 1658-1707. 

There are few things more 'startling in the history of this 
style than the rapid decline of taste that set in with the acces- 
sion of AurangzIb. The {rawer of the Mughal empire reached 
• its culminating point ip his reign, and there were at least no 
external signs of de»y Risible before the end of his reign. Even 
if his morose disposition did not lead him to spend much money 
on palaces or civil buildings, bis religious fanaticism might, one 
would think, have led him to surpass his predecessors in the extent 
or splendour of their mosques or religious establishments. 



Chap. X. 


AURANGZIB, OR ’ALAMGIR. 


3*1 


This, however, is far from being the case. He did, indeed, as 
mentioned above, pull down the temple of Vlrvervar.at Benares, 
in order to erect a mosque, whose tall and grac^ul minarets still 
form one of the most prominent features in eveiy view of the 
city. After the shrine of 5 iva at Benares, the great temple 
of Kerava Deva or Krishna at Mathuri was the most sacred in 
Hindustan. It had been erected, or rebuilt, by the famous 
Blr-Singh Bundel^ during the reign of Jahingtr at a cost of 
thirty-three ISkhs of rupees ; ^ and immediately after the destruc- 
tion of the VLrvefvar temple in 1669, “ his religious Majesty ” 
ordered this also to be levelled to the ground and a vast 
mosque, about 170 ft. in length, to be erected on the platform.* 

It was not, however, from any love of architectural magni- 
ficence that this was done, but to insult his Hindi! subjects 
and mark the triumph of Islim over Hinduism. The mosques 
themselves are of no great magnificence, but, except that at 
Ldhor, none more important was erected, so far as I know, 
during his reign. 

The Jflmi’ or Bddsh&hi mosque at L&hor, which is entered 
from the west side of the HazQri B&gh (Woodcut No. 430), was 
erected in 1674 from the proceeds of the estates of his eldest 
brother DSri Shikoh, whom he had put to death in 1659. The 
gateway from the Hazdri Bflgh, raised on a lofty platform set 
on arches, is an imposing structure of red sandstone and marble. 
In a chamber above this archway are preserved certain “ relics” 
of Muhammad and his family. The mosque itself, erected 
under the supervision of Fid&t Khin Koka, the emperor’s foster- 
brother, is a building of considerable merit and the latest 
specimen of the Mughal architectural style. It has three domes 
of white marble and very pleasing form, and in this and the 
general arrangements of the facade it is almost a copy of the 
jami’ Masjid at Delhi, but the marble ornamentation of the 
great central arch and the front arcade is very inferior in 
detail * ; and the minarets, instead of terminating the facade, are 
quite plain octagonal towers, placed at the corners of the court 
about 175 yards apart. They are, as usual, of three storeys, but 
their cupolas had to be removed after an earthquake in 18^. 

Few things can show how steadily and rapidly the decline of 
taste had set in than the fact that when that monarch was 

^ It was described in some detail by Rind of Udaypur, and is now at 
Tavernier, w'ho saw it in 1650.— Bairs NdthdiyAra. 

translation of Tavernier’s ’ Travels,’ vol. ’ * Transactions Royal Institute of 
ii. pp. 240ff. Bernier also mentions it British Architects,’ N. Ser. vol. v. p. 66 ; 
in 1063.— * Travels’ (ed. 1891), p. 284. G. Le Bon, ’ Les Monuments de I’lnde,’ 

^ Elliot's * History of India,’ vol. vii. p. 220 and fig. 358. This mosoue was 
p. 184. The idol— an image of Krishna used by the Sikhs as a magazine, but was 
-^had just been removed ^ lUijasimha restored to the Mubammaoans in 1856. 



|3a INDIAN SAfeACENIC ARCHtTECTURE. fioOK Vll. 

residing at Aurang&b&d between the years i66o-yo having lost 
his favourite wife,^ Rabia Daur&ni, the tomb in honour of her 
memory — which is ascribed to her third son A’zam Sh&h — ^was 
intended, it is said, to reproduce an exact copy of Sh&h Jah&n’s 
celebrated tomb, the T&j Mahall. But the difference between 
the two monuments, even in so short an interval, is startling. 
The first stands alone in the world for certain qualities all can 
appreciate; the second is by no means remarkable for any 
qualities of elegance or design, and narrowly escapes vulgarity 
and bad taste. In the beginning of the nineteenth century a 
more literal copy of the T&j was erected in Lucknow over 
the tomb of one of its sovereigns. In this last, however, 
bad taste and tawdriness reign supreme. It is difficult to 
understand how a thing can be so like in form and so unlike 
in spirit; but so it is, and these three T&jes form a very 
perfect scale by which to measure the decline of art after 
the great Mughal dynasty passed its zenith and began its 
rapid downward career. 

Aurangzlb himself lies buried in the court of the tomb of 
Shaikh Zainu-d-Dtn, at Khuld&b&d, a small hamlet just above 
the caves of ElfirA The spot is esteemed sacred, but the tomb 
is mean and insignificant beyond what would have sufficed for 
any of his nobles. He neglected, apparently, to provide for 
himself this necessary adjunct to a Tartar’s glory, and his 
successors were too weak, even had they been inclined, to 
supply the omission. Strange to say, the sacred Tulsi-tree of 
the Hindus onc'e took root in a crevice of the brickwork, and 
flourished there as if in derision of the most bigoted persecutor 
the Hindfis ever experienced. 

As before observed, Aurangzib also made a few additions to 
the palace at Delhi ; but during his reign many splendid palaces 
wer6 erected, both in the capital and elsewhere. The most 
extensive and splendid of these was that built by bis aspiring 
but unfortunate brother D&r& Shikoh. It, however, was con- 
verted into the English residency; and so completely have 
improvements, with plaster and whitewash, done their work, 
that it requires some ingenuity to find out that it was not 
wholly the work of the Anglo-Saxons. 

In the town of Delhi many palaces of the age of Aurangzlb 
long escaped this profanation, but generally they are either in 
ruins or used as shops ; and with all their splendour show too 
clearly the degradation of style which had then fairly set in, 
and which is even more apparent in the modern capitals of 

* Auimnrab married Dilras IWmi Safawi, in 1637, who bore 10 him five sons 
Begun, a daughter of Shahnawaz Khan and four daughters. 



Chap. X. 


MYSORE AND OUDH. 3»3 

Oudh, Haidaribid, and other cities which have risen into 
importance during the last hundred years. 

Even these capitals, however, are not without edifices of a 
palatial class, which from their size and the picturesqueness of 
their forms deserve attention, and to an eye educated among 
the plaster glories of the Alhambra would seem objects of no 
small interest and beauty. Few, however, are built of either 
marble or squared stone : most of them are of brick or rubble- 
stone, and the ornaments in stucco, which, coupled with the 
inferiority of their design, will always prevent their being 
admired in immediate proximity with the glories of Agra and 
Delhi. 

In a history of Muhammadan art in India which had any 
pretensions to be exhaustive, it would be necessary to describe 
before concluding many minor buildings, especially tombs, 
which are found in every corner of the land. For, in addition 
to the Imperial tombs mentioned above, the neightourhoods of 
Agra and Delhi are crowded with those of the nobles of the 
court, some of them scarcely less magnificent than the mausolea 
of their masters. 

Besides the tombs, however, in the capitals of the empire, 
there is scarcely a city of any importance in the whole course 
of the Ganges or jamnfi, even as far eastward as Dacca, that 
does not possess some specimens of this form of architectural 
magnificence. Jaunpur and Allahabad are particularly rich in 
examples ; but Patna and Dacca possess two of the most 
pleasing of the smaller class of tombs that are to be met with 
anywhere. 


Mysore and Oudh. 

If it were worth while to engrave a sufficient number of 
illustrations to make the subject intelligible, one or two chapters 
might very easily be filled with the architecture of these two 
dynasties. That of Mysore, though only lasting forty years 
— A.D. 1760-1799 — was sufficiently far removed from European 
influence to practise a style retaining something of true 
architectural character. The pavilion called the Darya Daulat 
at Seringapatam resembles somewhat the nearly contemporary 
palace at D!g in style, but is feebler and of a much less 
ornamental character. The tomb, too, of the founder of the 
dynasty, and the surrounding mausolea, retain a reminiscence 
of former greatness, but will not stand comparison with the 
Imperial tomte of Agra and Delhi. 

On the other hand, the tomb of Abil-1 Mansfir Kh4n Safdar 
Jang (1739*1754)1 the second of the Nawib Vazlrs of Oudh, 



3>4 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


situated about 5 miles from the Qutb at Delhi, is not quite 
unworthy of the locality in which it is found. Though so late 
in date (A.D. 1756), it looks grand and imposing at a distance, 
but it will not bear close inspection (Plate XXXIV.). It stands 
in a large garden and is raised on a terrace, 10 ft. high and 
no ft. square, over arched cells. The tomb is about 60 ft. 
square, and in the general arrangements of the plan is not un> 
like that of Humi)dln. The central room, about 20 ft. square, 
contains the very handsome marble monument, highly iK>lished 
though somewhat florid in design. The floor and lower portion 
of the walls 'are faced with marble, and it is roofed by a flattish 
dome at a height of about 40 ft. Round this apartment are 
four square and four octagonal rooms on the ground floor, 
with the like arrangement above.^ Respecting the whole, Mr. 
Fanshawe remarks:^ “If the decoration of the corner towers 
is hot successful, the combination of white marble and fawn- 
coloured sandstone in the centre is pleasing. The plaster 
decoration of the interior is perhaps more degraded than 
anything else about the tomb.” Even this qualified praise 
can hardly be awarded to any of the buildings in the capital in 
which his dynasty was finally established. 

If mass and richness of ornamentation were in themselves 
sufficient to constitute architecture, few capitals in India could 
show so much df it as Lucknow. It is, in fact, amazing to 
observe to what an extent this dynasty filled its capitals with 
gorgeous buildings during the one short century of its existence, 
but all — or . with the fewest possible exceptions — in the .worst 
possible taste. Whatever may be said of the Renaissance, or 
revival of classical architecture in Europe in the i6th century, 
in India it was an unmitigated misfortune. The unintelligent 
vulgarity with which the “ Orders ” are there used, by a people 
who were capable of such noble things in their own st)des, is one 
of the hiost startling phenomena in the history of architecture. 

One of the earliest buildings of importance at Lucknow, in 
the Italian style, is the Mansion of Constantia,’ built by General 
Claude Martin, as a residence for himself, and only completed 
after his death.* 


* Carr Stephen, * Archaeology of Delhi,’ 
p. 278. 

^ * Delhi Past and Present,’ p. 246, 
from which the Plate XXXIV. is repro- 
duced. 

* So called apparently from the motto 
Lahore et Constantia,” adopted by the 

General, and written up in front of his 
house. ’ 

* General Marlin was born at Lyons in 


1732, and died at Lucknow 1800. He 
commenced his career as a private soldier 
in the French army ; but, in consequence 
of Lally’s severity, deserted at the si^e 
of Pondicheriy, and joined the English 
'.service, in which he rose to the ra& of 
Captain. He was transferred in 1776 to 
the service of the Naw&b of Oudh, and 
in 1796 was promoted to be Major- 
General. He left a considerable part ol 



Chap. X. 


MYSORE AND OUDH. 


3*5 


The General was apparently hts own architect, and has 
produced a design somewhat fantastic in arrangement, which 
sins against most of the rules of pure Palladian Art to an extent 
that would not be pardonable except in such a climate and 
under the peculiar circumstances in which it was erected. Not- 
withstanding this, there is something very striking in the great 
central tower, rising from a succession of terraced roofs one 
over' the other, and under which are a series of halls grouped 
internally so sis to produce the most pleasing effects, while their 



438. View of the ^Ta^tiniire, Lucknow. (From a Photograph.) 


arrangement was at the same time that most suitable to the 
climate. The sky-line is everywhere broken by little kiosks, 
not perhaps in the best taste, but pleasing from their situation, 
and appropriate in the .vicinity of a town so full of such 
ornaments as the city in whose proximity it is situated. Taken 
altogether, it is a far more reasonable edifice than the rival 
capriccio of Beckford, at Fonthill; and if its details had been 
purer, and some of those solecisms avoided which an amateur 

his immense fortune (of about ,^330, 000) having drawn it up himself,^ in bad 
to found educational establishments at English, the principal part of his money 
Lyons, Calcutta, and Lucknow ; but, was wasted in law expenses, 
owing to the length of his will, and his 


3*6 INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE, Book VII. 

architect is sure to fall into, it really does contain the germ of a 
very beautiful design (Woodcut No. 438). 

The founder was buried beneath in a dimly-lighted vaulted 
chamber in the basement of the great tower.^ His tomb is a 
simple, plain sarcophagus, standing on the floor, and at each 
angle a grenadier in full uniform stands with arms reversed, in 
an attitude of grief, as if mourning over the fall of his master. 
The execution of the monument, like everything about the 
place, is bad, but the conception is one of the finest that has 
been hit upon for a soldier’s grave. 

When new, this mansion must have been very striking. At 
all events, its effect on the Oudh sovereigns was most remark- 
able. For although their tombs, their mosques, and im&mbSras 
were still erected in the debased Saracenic style then prevalent, 
all the palaces of Lucknow were henceforth erected in this 
pseudo-Italian style. The Farhat Bakhsh built by Sa’^dat ’Alt 
Kh4n, the Chattar Manzil of Nastru-d-Dtn Haidar, and numerous 
other buildings, display all the quaint, picturesque irregularity 
of the age of Francis I., combined with more strange details 
than are to be found in the buildings of Henry IV. These 
were far surpassed in grotesqueness by the- Qaisar B&gh of 
Wajid ’Alt Sh&h. This consisted of a great square of buildings 
surrounding an immense courtyard : the whole palace being in 
extent and arrangement by no means unlike the Louvre and 
Tuileries as joined together by Napoleon III, But instead of 
the beautiful stone of Paris, all was brick and plaster ; and 
instead of the appropriate details of that palace, the buildings 
surrounding the great court at Lucknow are generally two 
storeys in height and singularly various in design, generally 
with pilasters of the most attenuated forms running through 
both storeys, between which Italian windows with Venetian 
blinds alternate with Saracenic arcades, or openings of no style 
whatever.^ These are surmounted by .Saracenic battlements, 
aqd crowned by domes such as Rome or Italy never saw, and 
the whole painted with colours as crude as they are glaring. 
Inside there are several large and handsome halls, but all in the 
same bad taste as the exterior. 

A detached building called the Begam Kothi is a better 
specimen of the style than anything perhaps in the Qaisar B&gh 
itself, but it cannot either be called a favourable specimen of 
Italian Art, or a successful adaptation of the style to Oriental 
purposes, though it has a certain amount of picturesqueness 

I Awfu-d-dauld had wished to buy the his tomb prepared in it. The mutineers 
building for ic» likhs of rupees, and to in 1857-58 occupied the building, and 
prevent its confiscation by the native they o^ned his tomb and scattered the 
court after bis death, General Martin had bones. The tomb was restored in 1865. 



Chap. X. 


MYSORE AND OUDH. 


387 


which to some extent redeems its other defects (Woodcut 
No. 439). Like all the other specimens of Oriental Italian 
Architecture, it offends painfully, though less than most others, 
from the misapplication of the details of the Classical Orders. 



439* Begam Kothl, Lucknow. (From a Photograph.) 


Of course no native of India can well understand either the 
origin or motive of the various parts of our Orders — why the 
entablature should be divided in architrave, frieze, and cornice 
— why the shafts should be a certain number of diameters in 
height, and so on. It is, in fact, like a man trying to copy an 
inscription in a language he does not understand, and of which 
he does not even know the alphabet. With the most correct 
eye and the greatest pains he cannot do it accurately. In 
India, besides this ignorance of the grammar of the art, the 
natives cannot help feeling that the projection of the cornices is 
too small if meant to produce a shadow, and too deep to be of 
easy construction in plaster in a climate subject to monsoons. 
They feel that brick pillars ought to be thicker than the Italian 
Orders generally are, and that wooden architraves are the worst 
possible mode of construction in a climate where wood decays 
so rapidly, even if spared by the white ants. The consequence 
is, that, between his ignorance of the principles of Classic Art on 



328 INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 

the one hand, and his knowledge of what is suited to his wants 
and his climate on the other, he makes a sad jumble of the 
Orders. But fashion supplies the Indian with those incentives 
to copying which we derive from association and education ; and, 
in the vain attempt to imitate his superiors, he has abandoned 
his own beautiful art to produce the strange jumble of vulgarity 
and bad taste we find at Lucknow and elsewhere. 

The great caravansarais which the Calcutta Bibus and the 
native Rijis have erected for their residences in Lower Bengal 
are generally in this style, but with an additional taint of 
vulgarity. But perhaps the most striking example of it all is a 
pavilion which was erected within the palace at Delhi by the 
last king. It stood behind, and was seen above, the great 
audience hall of Shih Jahin, in which once stood the celebrated 
peacock throne, and is one of the noblest and most beautiful 
apartments of its class in any palace in the world. Over this, 
on entering the palace, you saw a little pavilion of brick and 
plaster, which its builder assumed to be the Doric Order, with 
Italian windows and Venetian blinds. The building was painted 
green, the frieze red, and the ornaments yellow ! — the whole in 
worse taste than the summer-house of a Dutch skipper, as seen 
overhanging a canal in Holland. Contrasted with the simplicity 
and elegance of the white marble palace beneath, it told, in 
a language^ Qot to be mistaken, how deeply fallen and how 
contemptible were the late occupants of the throne, as compared 
with their great ancestors of the house of Timur, who ruled 
that mighty empire, and adorned its cities with those faultless 
edifices described in the previous part of this work.* 

Even at Lucknow, however, there are some buildings into 
which the European leaven has not penetrated, and which are 
worthy of being mentioned in the same volume a' works of 
their ancestors. Among these is the great ImAmbftra,* which, 
though its details will not bear too rinse an examination, is still 
conceived^ on so grand a scale as to entitle it to rank with the 
buildings of an earlier age. It was built by Asafu-d-daula, the 
fourth NawAb, as a relief work during the famine of 1784. 

As seen by the plan of the ImAmbAra (Woodcut No. 440), 
the principal apartment is 162 ft. long by 53 ft. 6 in. wide. On 
the two sides are verandahs, respectively 26 ft. 6 in. and 27 ft. 
3 in. wide, and at each end. an octagonal apartment, 53 ft. in 
diameter, the whole interior dimensions being thus 263 ft. by 


^ * History of the Modern Styles of ’All and liis sons Hasan and Husain are 

Anchitecture/ jrd ed., vol. ii. pp. 301 f. held ; and their Ta’zias or shrines are 

* Or ImftmMrt, a building in which preserved in it. Under this ImatnbSra 

the Moharram festival is celeljraied sM its founder was buried. It now serves as 

commemorative services of the deaths df an ar!>cnal fur the Brilisli garrison. 



Chap. X. 


MYSORE AND OUDH. 


3»9 


145 ft. This immense building is covered with vaults .of very 
simple form and still simpler construction, being of a rubble or 
coarse concrete several feet in thickness, which is laid on a rude 
mould or centering of bricks and mud, and allowed to stand a 
year or two to set and dry. The centering is then removed. 



440. Plan of Indnibilra at Lucknow. (From Measurements by the Author.) Scale 

TOO ft. to I in. 


and the vault, being in one piece, stands without abutment or 
thrust, apparently a better and more durable form of roof than our 
most scientific Gothic vaulting ; certainly far cheaper and far more 
easily made, since it is literally cast on a mud form, which may be 
moulded into any shape the fancy of the architect may dictate. 

The earlier settlers in India felt themselves so completely 
expatriated and cut off from intercourse with Europe, that they 
adopted many of the habits and feelings of the people among 
whom they were dwelling. Among other peculiarities they seem 
to have been seized with a mania for sepulchral magnificence ; 
and at Surat, AhmadAbAd, and other early settlements on the 
West Coast, we find Dutch and English tombs of the 17th 
century which rival in dimensions and are similar in form to 
those of the Muhammadan princes of the day. It is true, when 
closely looked into, their details will not bear examination. 
Their builders had a notion that pillars should be round, and 
arches circular, and a hazy reminiscence of the Orders ; but they 
could not draw them, and the natives could not realise what was 
wanted from imperfect verbal instructions. The consequence is, 
we find domes supported on twelve pillars of no style whatever, 
and native details mixed with something which has no name, in 
a manner that is perplexing, though often picturesque. Being 
all in brickwork and stucco, most of them are now falling to 
ruin; but that of Sir George Oxenden (died 1669) and his 
brother Christopher at Surat is still kept in repair, and would 



330 


INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 


make a sensation in Kensal Green. It consists of a cupola in 
memory of Christopher within the loftier and larger mausoleum 
of his distinguished brother, which is of two storeys, 'with a 



441. English Tombs, Surat. Sir Geo. Oxtnden’s on the left. 

(From a Photograph.) 


height of 40 ft. and diameter 25 ft.' (Woodcut No. 441). Some 
of the others, especially the older ones, are in better taste, and 
approach more nearly the native models from which they were 
all more or less copied.^ 

It would be a curious and instructive subject of specula- 
tion to try to ascertain what would have been the fate of 
Muhammadan architecture in India had no European influence 
been brought to bear upon it. The materials for the enquiry 
are not abundant, but we can perceive that the decadence had 
set in long before the death of Aurangzib. It is also evident 

^ Anderson’s ' English in Western Dutch cemetery at Surat, is said to have 

p. 196 ; * Journal Bombay Br. R. exceeded the others in magnificence. 

Asiatic Sbeiety,* vol. vi, pp. i46fF. The ® ‘ Fiistory of Modern Architecture,' 
tomb of Baron IT. A. van Re^e, in the 3rd ed. vol. ii. p. 289. 




Chap. X. 


MYSORE AND OUDH. 


331 


that in such buildings as were erected at Agra or Delhi during 
the lapse of the i8th century, even where no European influence 
can be traced, there is a feebleness and want of true perception, 
though occasionally combined with a considerable degree of 
elegance. There, however, the enquiry fails, because European 



442. Tomb of MaijI SAhiba at Jun<1gadh. (From a Photograph.) 

influence made itself felt before any actual change had developed 
itself, but in remote corners the downward progress became 
apparent without any extraneous assistance. This is partially 
the case, as just mentioned, in Mysore ; but there is a cemetery 
at JunSgadh, in GujarAt, where there exists a group of tombs, 
all erected within last century, some within the last forty or 






332 INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 

fifty years, which exhibit more nearly than any others I am 
acquainted with the forms toward which the style was tending. 
This style is not without a certain amount of elegance in 
detail (Woodcut No. 442).' The tracery of the windows is 
frequently fascinating from its beauty, and all the carving is 
executed with precision and appropriateness — but it is all 
wooden, or, in other words, every detail would be more 
appropriate for a sideboard or a bedstead, or any article of 
upholstery, than for a building in stone. The domes especially 
^can hardly *be traced back to their grand and solemn form as 
used by the Path&n architects. The pinnacles are fanciful, and 
the brackets designed more for ornament than work. It is a 
style, in fact, broken loose from the triie principles of constructive 
design, and when this is the case, no amount of ornament, 
however elegant it may be, will redeem the want of propriety 
it inevitably exhibits. 

It is curious, however, and instructive, in concluding our 
history of architecture as practised within the limits of India 
properly so called, to observte how completely we have been 
walking in a circle. We began by tracing how, two hundred 
years before Christ, a wooden style was gradually assuming 
lithic forms, and by degrees being elaborated into a style where 
hardly a reminiscence of wood remained. We conclude with 
finding thfe 'style of Halebtd arid BijApiir, or Delhi, returning 
to forms as appropriate to carpentry but as unsuited to masonry 
as the rails dr gateways at Bharaut or Sanchi. It might some 
time ago have been a question worth mooting whether it was 
likely it would perish b}’ persevering in this wrong direction. 
That enquiry, b^owever, seems idle now, as it is to be feared 
that the death-biow will be given, as at Lucknow and elsewhere, 
•by the fatal imitation of a foreign style. 


‘Archaeological Suivcn nf Western India.* \ol, ii. pp, 176-177, and plates 37-39. 



CHAPTER XI. 

WOODEN ARCHITECTURE. 
CONTENTS. 

Mosque of Shih Hamad^n, Srinagar. 


Kashm!k. 

Turning for the nonce from this quasi-wooden style — which is 
only an indication of decadence and decrepitude — it would be 
pleasing if we could finish our narrative with the description 
of a true wooden style as it exists in Kashmir. The J&mi’ 
Masjid, in the city of .Srinagar, is a large and important building, 
and if not so magnificent as some of those described in the 
preceding pages, is of great interest from being designed to be 
constructed in wood, and wood only. A knowledge of its 
peculiarities would^ consequently, help us much in understanding 
many problems thjkt arise in investigating the history of archi- 
tecture in India. Unfortunately it is not a fashionable building, 
and 6f the looi tourists who visit the valley no one mentions 
it, ^nd no photographer has yet set up his camera within its 
precincts.* 

Its plan is the usual one : a courtyard surrounded by 
cloisters of three arcades wide on the east side and four on 
the other three, its peculiarity being that all the pillars that 
support its roofs are of Deodar pine — not used, of course, to 
imitate stone or stone construction, but honest wooden forms, 
as in Burmese monasteries and elsewhere. The carving on 
them is, I believe, rich and beautiful, and though dilapidated, 
the effect is said to be still singularly pleasing.. 

There is one other mosque in the same city, known as that 

‘ If Lieut. Cole, insieaiT of repealing rendered a service all would have been 
plans and details of buildings ^\llich hatl grateful for. What I know of it is princi* 
already been published In- Gen. Cunning- pally derived from verbal communication 

ham, had given us a plan and details of with Col. Montgomerie, R.E. 
this unknown building, he might have 


334 INDIAN SARACENIC ARCHITECTURE. Book VII. 

of Sh&h Hamad&n (Woodcut No. 443), which Is equally erected 
wholly in wood, and though very much smaller than the Jimi’ 



443. Mosque of Sh&h Hoiitad&n, Srinagar. (From a Photograph.) 

Masjtd, is interesting, in the first place, because its roof is 
probably very similar to that which once covered the temple at 
M&rtftnd (Woodcut No. 146), and the crowning ornament is 
evidently a reminiscence of a Buddhist Htl, very much altered, 





Chap. XI. 


WOODEN ARCHITECTURE. 


335 


it must be confessed, but still not so very unlike some found 
in Nep&l, at SwayambhOnith (Woodcut No. 155), for instance, 
and elsewhere. 

The walls, too, are of interest to us, because the mode in 
which the logs are disposed and ornamented resembles the 
ornamentation of the Orissan temples more clearly than any 
stone forms we can call to mind. The courses of the stone 
work in the tower of the great temple at Bhuvanerwar (Woodcut 
No. 315), and other temples there, produce so nearly the same 
effect, that it does not seem improbable they may have been 
derived from some such original. The mode, too, in which the 
Orissan temples are carved, and the extent to which that class 
of ornamentation is carried, is much more suggestive of a wooden 
than of a lithic origin. 

These, however, are questions that can only be profitably 
discussed when we have more knowledge of this Kashmiri style 
than we now possess. When the requisite materials are avail- 
able for the purpose, there are few chapters that will be of 
greater interest, or that will more worthily conclude the 
Architectural History of India than those that treat of the true 
and false styles of wooden art, with which the narrative begins, 
and with which it also ends. 




HISTORY 


OF 

EASTERN ARCHITECTURE 

IN 

FURTHER INDIA, CHINA AND JAPAN. 

REVISED AND EXTENDED 


BY R. PHENfe SPIERS, F.S.A., F.R.I.B.A., ETC. 




BOOK VIII. 

FURTHER INDIA. 


.•> 

CHAPTER I. 

BURMA. 

CONTENTS. 

Introductory — ^Types of Religious Buildings — Circular Pagodas — Square 
Temples, etc. — Ruins of Thatdn, Prome, and Pagin — Monasteries. 


Introductory. 

The styles of architecture described in the preceding chapters 
of this work practically exhaust the enumeration of all those 
which were practised in India Proper, with its adjacent island 
of Ceylon, from the earliest dawn of our knowledge till the 
present day. It might, therefore, be possible to treat their 
description as a work complete in itself, and to conclude without 
reference to other styles practised in neighbouring countries. 
It will add, however, immensely, not only to the interest but 
to the completeness of the work, if the history is continued 
through the architectural forms of those countries which adopted 
religions originating in India, and borrowed with them archi- 
tectural forms which expressed, with more or less distinctness, 
how far their religious beliefs differed from, or agreed with, 
those of the country from which they were derived. 

The first of these countries to which we naturaliy turn is 
Burma, which adopted the religion of S'&kyamuni at a very 
early period, and borrowed also many of the Indian forms of 
architecture, but with differences we are now at a loss to account 
for. It may be, that, as we know nothing practically of the 
architectural forms of the Lower Bengal provinces before the 
beginning of the 6th century, these forms may have been taken 
to Prome and Pegu before that time; or it may be that a 



340 


FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


northern or Tibetan element crept into Burma across the 
northern mountains by some route we cannot now follow. These 
are interesting problems we shall not be able to solv6 till we 
have a more critical knowledge than we now possess of Burmese 
buildings. Thanks to the zeal and intelligence of some English 
travellers, we do know a great deal about Burmese art. The 
works of Symes,' Crawfurd,’ and, above all, of Colonel Yule,' 
are replete with information ; but what they did was done 
in the intervals they were able to snatch from pressing public 
duties. \^hat is really wanted is, that some qualified person 
should take up the subject specially, and travel through the 
country with no other object than to investigate its antiquities. 

This was attempted between 1884-1888, when Professor 
Forchammer' was sent on a mission to study the temples in 
West Burma, but he unfortunately died before he could com- 
plete his task, and although his descriptions and plans of 
buildings at Mrohaung in Arakan and Kyaukku in Pag&n 
are of great value, the former are not always quite intelligible 
owing to his want of acquaintance with architectural features. 

This was not the case with Mr. Oertel,' an engineer and 
architect in the Government service, who visited Burma with 
a similar object, but his permit was limited to about two months, 
so that he was only able to see some of the architectural centres. 
His report,, however, contains much useful information, and 
the photographs which he took are of some value. 

In Mr. Nisbet’s work,' published in 1901, is a chapter on 
Burmese architecture which shows careful research, and he 
is perhaps the first writer on the subject who has drawn up 
a list of the oldest buildings in Pag&n, giving the dates of their 
erection and the names of the kings by whom they were built. 
.Many other works have appeared since the British Annexation 
of Burma, in some cases containing illustrations from photo- 
graphs which add to our knowledge. Among these sjiould 
be mentioned General de Beylie’s work,’' in which nearly one 
hundred pages are devoted to Burma, where he carried out some 
researches in the early part of 1907. The most important source 
of information at present, however, is given in the annual reports 
published by the Government of Burma,' giving details of the 

' * Embassy to Ava in 1795.’ London, * * Notes on a Tour in Burma in 1902/ 
1800. 4to., 27 plates. by Fred. O. Oertel, F.R.I.B.A. 

'Journal or Embassy to Court of * 'Burma under British Rule and 
Ava,’ 1827. 4to., plates. Before,’ by John Nisbet, D.QC.C., 1901. 

^ 'Mission to Court of Ava, in 1855.’ ^ * L’ Architecture Hindoue en Extreme 

4to., numerous illustrations. Orient,' by General L. de Beyli^, Z907. 

^ i^kan ; I. Mahdmuni Pagoda, II. * Reports of the Superintendent of 

Mfotiattng: III. Akyab: Sandowayand the Archteological Survey, Burma, 1902- 
the Kyaukku Temple, Pag8n, 1891. 1908.’ 



Chap. I. 


BURMA. 


34 * 


work required from year to year in order to preserve the existing 
monuments from further decay. These reports are supplemented 
in the India Office Library by a lai^e number of photographs 
of the principal buildings with descriptive notes, giving in many 
cases the dates of their erection ; it is to be hoped, therefore, 
that the subject will be taken up by some expert, and that 
the measured drawings of plans and sections, lists of which 
appear in the reports,, may be published with reproductions 
of a selection of the fine series of photographs, some of which 
have been utilised in this work. 

Types of Religious Buildings. 

The term Pagoda (in Burmese, Pay4) seems to be applied 
by Europeans in Burma indifferently to two very different 
kinds of structure. Firstly: a bell-shaped stfipa raised on a 
series of terraces or platforms and crowned with a conical finial. 
To these the term tsedi or zedi, which corresponds with the 
Chaitya in Nep<^I and the Chedi of Siam, is sometimes given. 
They consist of solid masses of brickwork, with a small sealed-up 
chamber in the ment containing supposed relics of Buddha. 
Secondly: a temple which is square on plan with sometimes 
projecting porches or vestibules and, in the thickness of the 
walls, narrow corridors, the walls of which are decorated with 
frescoes or sculpture, with niches at intervals containing images 
of Buddha. Their roofs are pyramidal, consisting of a series 
of storeys of moderate height set back one behind the other 
and crowned with the curvilinear dkhara of the Indo-Aryan 
style. 

This. may be considered a sufficient indication that they 
derived .some, at least, of their architectural features, as well as 
their religion, from India; but as this form was adopted by 
both Jains and Hindus in the north of India, from the mouths 
of the Indus to the Bay of Bengal in that age, it hardly enables 
us to point out the particular locality from which it was derived, 
or the time at which it was first introduced. It is, however, so 
far as we at present know, the only instance of its being found 
out of India Proper. 

CIRCUL.VR P.\GOD.AS OR CHAITY.VS. 

One of the earliest examples existing is that at Bu-pay&, at 
Pagein, ascribed to the first years of the 3 rd century, A.D., which 
although it has been repaired and renovated in later periods 
probably retains the original type of its design.^ The centre 
portion or bell is of bulbous form, raised on a triple base and 



34 * 


FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIIl. 


cratAied with two features, the lower one a bold torus moulding, 
'tibe npiper one a conical finial, with cavetto sinkings betu^n the 
, 1^11 and the torus and between the latter and the iinial. A 
^milar bulbous form is found in the pagoda of Ngakwe Nadaung 
in ^e province of Myingyan, dating from the loth century, and 
in a less pronounced form in the Petleik>payA pagoda, where 
the torus becomes an important feature, we find here , also the 
earliest example of the decorative bands carried about two- 
thirds up the tcU, which has probably given rise to the idea that 
the.upper paut of the same represents the begging bowl of the 
mendicant monks. 

There are, besides, three or four early examples in which a 
different outline is given to the bell. .The Baubaugyt pagoda in 
Prome consists of a solid mass in brickwork of a (ylindrical 
form, about 8o it high, raised on a triple base and surmounted 
by a finial carrying the Htt^ or umbrella, which is always in 
iron-gilt, a feature which crowns every pagoda, the total height 
being about 150 ft. It is ascribed to the yth or 8th century, as 
also two other examples in Prome, the Payagy! and Payama 
pagodas. These, however, have convex outlines and resemble 
a bee-hive in shape. In all these cases the relative proportion 
between the height and the lower diameter is about 3 to 2, 
differing therefore greatly from the Indian tope. These are, 
however, Exceptional examples, as from the lith century, when 
the great development of Burmese architecture commenced, 
the Sthpa or tope always took the form of a bell, sometimes of 
great size with decorative bands round, and raised on a ‘series 
of three to five stages or platforms decorated with boldly pro- 


jecting mouldings with square panels between. These plat- 
forms are generally either square on plan * or have a series of 
projecting planes one in front of the other. In early examples 

# the projections are greater than in later ones, 
but their appearance can best be judged from 
Plate XXXVII., representing the Shwe- 
Dagdn at Rangoon, where the four planes on 
each face have resulted in seven projecting 
angles at each corner of the platform. These 
projecting angles which occur so frequently, 
not only in the platforms, but sometimes in the 


444. CoDjectutai pun of superstructure, may have arisen from a desire 
a Temple. ^nrich and give more interest to the original 

square plan. Assuming A (W<^cut No. 444) to be the first 


structure, and B and C successive applications on each face. 


* Aiitt, vol. i. p. 70 and note a. in the Dhammayazifca pagodanear Fagan, 

* There is one exceptional example whidi is pentagonal. 




Chap. I. CIRCULAR PAGpDAS OR CHAITY AS. 343 

the result on the plan would be three angle projection* ; 
an entrance pdTch D added on each face would nve five 
angle projections, and so on.^ The platihrms oir wnii^ tte 
structare was raised would necessarily follow the same plan, 
and its repetition in the superstructure would iesult in tiie 
rikhara of Hindfi origin which has usually three angle pro* 
jections. In the diagram here given the applied projecting 
plane bn each face and its return are equal in dimensio n ; t^ 
is not usually the case, and sometimes the former is only about 
half the latter. The nearest approach to the diagram is that 
shown in the temple of Vit Sisavai at Sukho^3m in Siam 
(Plate XLVIL), where these angle projections form prominent 
features in the design. In 
tire Shwe-Hmaudau pagoda 
(Woodcut No. 445) the plan 
of the platform is octagonal, 
and here the projecting planes, 
three in number on each face, 
have given five angles. 

An instance of its intro- 
duction in the superstructure 
is shown *in the Abhayadana 
pagoda (Plate XXXVI.), 
where there are three project- 
ing angles in the elaborate 
cornice, carrying the finial. 

In the Seinnyet pagoda a 

similar cornice is more com- at'^egu. (F^SyiM.) s^mfL i^'iii. 
plicated, having seven project- 
ing angles and eight vertical fillets projecting one in front of 
the other. 

The principal variations made in the design of the Zedi are 
those of the relative proportion of the bell to the rest of the 
structure, the outline of the same and its superstructure, and 
the decoration employed. Thus in the Lokftnanda pagoda in 
Pag&n, built by Anaurahtft in 1059, the bell is of immense 
size, being three-sevenths of the total height of the structure, 
including the triple base and finial, and that is genendly the 
characteristic of the earlier examples, but, where occasionally 
employed to crown the jikharas of the square temple, as in the 
Abhayad&na temple, it is so small as to be scarcely recognisable. 
In the older pagodas of Pagiln the several mouldings are all 
more or less convex in outline, but in later examples, and 



‘ These pagodas aie generally described as polygonal on plan, a term whidi is 
mideading : multiplane would be mote correct. 


344 


FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


especially in those cases where the pagoda has from time to 
time been built over and enclosed, as in the Shwe-Hmaudau and 
Shwe-Dagdn, the converse outlines are alternated with concave 
silhouettes which, whilst it lessens the vigour and boldness of 
the design, gives it at times a certain elegance ; so far has that 
been carried that it is sometimes possible to determine the date 
of the structure by its attenuation. This is shown in the Shwe- 
Dagdn (Plate XXXVII.), where in the last rebuilding in 1768 
the lower part of the bell was widely spread out, and the hnial 
or spire, originally conical with straight side, has been given 
a concave outline. 

The decorative treatment of the pagoda resolves itself into 
three divisions. 

(A) The boldly projecting mouldings of the sides of the 
platforms or terraces, the introduction of square terra-cotta panels 
with figure bas-reliefs between the upper and lower mouldings, 
and m later examples the addition of an elaborate cresting. 

(B) The carving of lotus leaves at the base of the bell and in 
the upper part of the finial, the rich ornament applied to the 
bell consisting of pendants on its upper surface, a deep moulded 
ring round with bead festoons held in the mouths of gorgons and 
other surface ornament above the ring. The pagodas of Seinnyet 
and Petleik have in addition niches with figures of Buddhas on 
the four sides facing the cardinal points, with enriched pediments 
over-crowned with miniature storeys and jikharas. 

And (C) additional decorative features such as ranges of small 
pagodas on the lower terraces as in the Shwe-Dagdn and the 
Shwe-Hmaudau, or at each angle of the several terraces, in many 
cases taking the form of elaborate finials which in the Seinnyet 
pagoda are of fine design. 

Some of the pagodas have in the centre of each face a flight 
of ateps leading to the upper terraces, and on the level of the first 
platform, an archway similar to the examples in Boro-Budur. 
I;i one or two cases also there are porches in front of each flight 
of steps, cruciform in plan, similar to those of the temples of 
Cambraia. 

In the Sapada and Tamani pagodas, above the bell is a 
square moulded plinth which by some authorities is thought 
to be symbolic of the chamber in the basement containing the 
Buddmst relics, and is in fact known as the “dh&tu-garbha" 
or relic-chamber. The feature is, however, of ancient origin, 
as it is shown on the ddgabas in K&rld and Ajant& {ante, vol. i.. 
Woodcuts Nos. 70 and 71). It forms an essential feature in 
all the Sinhalese D&gabas, and as Sapada, the builder of the 
pagoda bearing his name, was a Buddhist monk from Ceylon, 
he probably introduced it into Burma. 



Chap. I. CIRCULAR PAGODAS OR CHAITYAS. 


345 


Two other -pagodas of exceptional form in and near Sagaing 
exist, the Tupaydn or StOpir&ma and the Kaung Hmaudau : the 
former was built in the ifth century by Narapati, King of Ava. 
Its plan is circular, and it consists of three storeys set back one 
behind the other with low pitched roof over the two lower storeys 
and a flat weathered top. On the vertical sides of the three 
storeys are projecting features like dormer windows, with a niche 
sunk in each ; there are forty-eight of these on the lower, forty- 
two on the middle, and thirty-six on the upper storey. The 
Kaung Hmaudau pagoda, not far from Mingfln, on the same side 
of the river, bears a close resemblance to Ae Indian topes ; the 
mass of the dome, according to Colonel Yule,^ is sibout lOO ft. 
diameter. It is taller than a semicircle — which would indicate a 



446. Kaung Hmaudau DAgaba, near Sagaing. (From Yule.) 

modern date — and stands on three concentric bases, each wider 
than the other. Round the whole is an enclosure, consisting 
of 812 stone posts, each .standing 4 ft. 6 in. out of the ground, 
with receptacles in their heads for lights, each head being 
hollowed out to hold the same, and divided into four quadrants 
by four stone gateways (Woodcut No. 446). An inscription, 
on a white marble slab, records the erection of this pagoda 
between the years 1636 and 1650. This Axes its date, and 
is curious as showing how little real change had occurr^ during 
the eighteen centuries which elapsed between the erection of 
the tope at Sanchi {aute^ vol. i., Woodcuts Nos. 12-14) ^nd the 
1 7th century. 

Perhaps the most important pagoda in the Burmese Empire 


^ * .Mission to Ava,' p. 65. 





FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


346 

is the great Shwe-Hmaudau ^ at Pegu, of which a plkn and eleva- 
tion are given in Symes’ account of his embassy to Ava. As will 
be seen from the plan (Woodcut No. 445), it deviates from the 
usual type, which is exclusively used in the edifices of this class 
hitherto described, haying an octagonal base together with those 
elaborated multiplane* forms which are affected by all the HindQ 
builders of modem date. It returns, however, to the circular 
form before terminating, and is crowned, like all Burmese build- 
ings of this class, by an iron Ht! richly gilt. Another peculiarity 
is strongly indicative of its modem date, namely .that around 
its base is a double range of miniature pagodas — a mode 
of ornamentation that subsequently became typical in HindA 
architecture — their temples and spires being covered, and, 
indeed, composednf innumerable models of themselves, clustered 
together so as to make up a whole. As before remarked, 
something of the same sort, occurs in Roman art, where every 
window and opening is surmounted by a pediment or miniature 
temple end, and in Gothic art, where a great spire is surrounded 
by pinnacles or spirelets ; but in these styles it is never carried 
to the same excess as in HindA art. 

The building stands on two terraces, the lower one about 
10 ft. high, and 1391 ft. square ; the upper one, 20 ft. in height, 
and 684 ft. square; from the centre ris6s the pagoda, the 
diameter of 'whose base is 395 ft. The small pagodas sur- 
rounding the base are ay ft. high, and 40 ft. in circumference : 
they are in two tiers, the lower one of 75 and the upper 53, 
in all 128; while the great pagoda itself rises to the height of 
324 ft. above its terrace, or 354 ft above the country, thus reach- 
ing a height about. equal to that of St. Paul’s Cathedral : while 
the side of the upper terrace is only 83 ft. less than that of the 
great Pyramid. 

Tradition ascribes its commencement to two merchants, who 
raised it to the height of 12 cubits, at an age sliglitly subsequent 
to that of Buddha himself. Successive kings of Pegu added to 
it from time to- time, till at last it assumed its present form, 
most probably about three or four centuries ago. 

The next in importance, so far as we know, is the more 
generally known Shwe - Dagdn pagoda at Rangoon (Plate 
XXXVII.), a building very similar in dimensions to the last 
named, and by no means unlike it, except that the outline of 
the base is cut up to even a greater extent, and the spire more 
attenuated— both signs of a comparatively modern date. 

Its history in fact follows that of many of the pagodas of 
Burma : originally it is said to have been only 27 ft. high and 


Literally ** Golden threat god. 



Chap. I. CIRCULAR PAGODAS OR CHAITYAS. 


347 


to have attained its present height and dimension by repeated 
casings many feet in thickness. About the middle of the 15th 
century the height of the pagoda was raised to 129 ft., terraces 
were built round the hilt, and the top — a platform— was paved 
with flagstones. In 1768 it reached its present height of 321 ft., 
not including the new Htt, which was presented by King Minddn 
Min ; the platform now measures goo ft. by 685 ft and rises 
about 165 ft above the base of the hill. On the top of the ground 
storey of the pagoda, the plan of which is multiplane with seven 
angular projections, are several miniature pagodas as at Pegu. 

There is, however, no essential diflerence between the two 
buildings, and this is principally interesting as leading us one 
step further in the series from the solid hemispherical mound 
to the attenuated spire, which, both in Burma and Siam, is the 
modem form usually assumed by these edifices, till they lose all 
but a traditional resemblance to the buildings from which they 
orginally sprang. 

The general appearance of these can be judged from the 
illustration (Plate XXXVII.) on the right and left of which are 
smaller pagodas which, with numerous other structures, are built 
round the platform. These are seen in the following woodcut 
(No. 447), where is also shown one of the leogriflTs which may be 
consider^ as the last lineal descendant of those great human- 
headed winged lions that once adorned the portals at the palaces 
at Nineveh and which there served a definite constructional 
purpose, whereas here they are simply isolated features. 

The Shwe-Dagdn pagoda, like all the more important ones, 
is fabled to have been commenced about 2300 years ago, or 
about the era of Buddha himself ; its sanctity, however, is owing 
to its containing relics, not only of Gaudama, the last Buddha, but 
also of his three predecessors — Buddha having vouchsafed eight 
hairs of his head to its two founders, on the understanding that 
they were to be enshrined with the relics of the three former 
Buddhas, where and when found.' After numerous miraculous 
indications, on this spot were dhtcdvered the staff of Kakusandha, 
believed to have lived some 3000 years B.C., the water-dipper 
of Kon&gamana, and the bathing garment of Kassapa, which, 
with the eight hairs above mentioned, are enshrined within this 
great pagoda.^ Originally, however, notwithstanding the value 
of its deposit, the building was small, and it is not more than 
a century and a half since it assumed its present form. 

' An/e, vol. 1. p. 63. on the soutli, Kathal)a on the west, and 

^ * Asiatic Researches/ vol.. xiv. p. 27a Gotania on the north. — Conf. an/e, vol. 
In their PayAs, Qiaity-as or StApas the i. pp. 23011, 27711 ; * Bvddhist Art in 
Burmese place Kattkasan or Kakusandha India,’ p. 195. 
on the east, Gaunagon or KonAgamana 



348 


FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


A crowd of smaller pagodas of all sizes, from 30 ft. to 200 ft. 
in height, surrounds the larger one ; in fact there is scarcely a 
village in the country that does not possess one or two of these 
structures, and in all the more important towns they are numbered 
by hundreds ; indeed, they may almost be said to be innumer- 
able. They are almost all quite modern, and so much alike as 



447. View of Pagoda in Rangoon. (From a Photograph.) 


not to merit any distinct or separate mention. They indicate, 
however, a great degree of progressive wealth and power in the 
nation, from the earliest times to the present day, and an increas- 
ing prevalence of the Buddhistic system. This is a direct con- 
trast to the history of Ceylon, whose glory was greatest in the 
earliest centuries of the Christian Era and was losing its purity 
at the time when the architectural history of Burma first dawns 





Chap. I. CIRCULAR PAGODAS OR CHAITYAS. 


349 


upon us. Thus the buildings of one country supplement those 
of the other, and present together a series of examj^es of the 
same class, ranging over more than 2000 years, if we reckon 
from the oldest dUgabas in Ceylon to the most modem in 
Burma. 

Another example of importance, the Shwe-zigon pagoda 
near Pagin, might here be included, especially as, although the 
original pagoda founded in 1094 was, according to Mr. Nisbet, 
built over and increased in 1 164, it at all events is less attenuated 
than either the .Shwe-Tshandau or the Shwe-Ds^dn. It retains 
also in its three lower storeys, with terraces and processional 
paths round, the primitive form of the early digabas. 

At a place called Minghn, about half-way between the 
former capital of Amarapura and the present one at Mandalay, 
are two pagodas, which are not without considerable interest for 
our present purposes ; if for no other reason, at least for this — 
that both were erected about a hundred and twenty years agOj 
and show that neither the forms nor aspirations of the art were 
wholly extinguished even in our day. The first, the Sinbyum^ 
pagoda, is circular in form, and was erected in the year 1790, 
in the reign of King Bodauhpayi (I7'8i-i8i9). As will be seen 
from the woodcut (No. 448), it is practically a d&gaba, with five 
concentric procession-paths. Each of these is ornamented by 
a curious serpent-like balustrade, interspersed with niches con- 
taining, or intend^ to contain, statues of Buddha, and is 
accessible by four flights of steps facing the four cardinal 
points. The whole is surrounded by a low circular wall 
750 ft. in diameter, said to represent the serpent Ananta. 
Within this is a basement, measuring about 400 ft. across, 
and this, with the procession-paths and d&gaba on the summit, 
make up seven storeys, intended, it is said, to symbolise the 
mythical Mount Meru.' 

The building was severely damaged by the earthquake of 
1838, but was restored by King Minddn Min in 1874; above 
the central tower shown in the woodcut (No. 448) a low storey 
has been built with projecting dormers and niches in them as 
in the Tupayon pagoda and, crowning the same, an octagonal 
base in two tiers supporting the bell, the finial with rings 
round and the Htt ; a series of five consecutive entrance porches 

' The above particulars are abstracted number of storeys^not mechanical, of 
from a paper t)y Col. Sladen in the course, but symbolicalj whether, in fact, 
‘Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,’ the basement should be counted as a 
vol. iv. (N.S.) p. 406, with remarks by storey, or not. The above I believe to 
Col. Yule and others. It is curious that be the correct enumeration. We shall 
there is a discrepancy between the native presentl;^ meet with the same difficulty 
and the European authorities as to the in describing Boro-Budur in Java. 



3S0 


FURTHER INDIA, 


Book VIII. 



Sinbyumc Circular Pagoda at Ming^ln. (From a Photograph.) 


Chap. I. CIRCULAR PAGODAS OR CHAITYAS. 351 

also rising one behind the other have been carried up to the 
height of the central tower. 

It will be recollected that, when speaking of the great 
digabas of Anur&dhapura in Ceylon, it was pointed out {ante, 
vol. i. p. 230) that they had three procession-paths round their 
bases, ascended in like manner by flights of steps opposite 
the four cardinal points of the compass. It is interesting to 
observe here, after a lapse of 2000 years, and at a distance of 
nearly 1500 miles, the changes have been so small. It is true 
the number of procession-paths has increased from three to 
flve, and the terraces become relatively much more important 
than in the older examples ; but, barring this and some changes 
in detail, the monuments are practically the same, notwithstand- 
ing all the curious varieties that have sprung up in the interval. 

The other building known as the MingQn-pay& was com- 
menced by Bodauhpay&, who spent twenty years over it, and 
died in 1819, leaving it incomplete. It would seem to have 
been an attempt to revive the old square forms of Pag&n, in 
the same manner as the other was intended to recall memories 
of the older forms of early Indian Buddhism. “ It stands on 
a basement of five successive terraces, of little height, the lower 
terrace forming a square of 450 ft. From the upper terrace 
starts the vast cubical pile of the pagoda, 230 ft. square in plan, 
and rising, in a solid mass, to the height of about 100 ft, with 
slightly sloping walls, Above this it contracts in successive 
terraces, three of which had been completed, raising the mass 
to a height of 165 ft, at the time the work was abandoned.” ^ 
From a model standing near, it is inferred that, if completed, 
it would have risen to the height of 500 ft; it is even now 
a solid mass containing between 6,ooo,cxx) and 7,cxx),ooo cubic 
ft of brickwork. Had it been carried out, it would have been 
the tallest building in the world. It was, however, shattered 
by an earthquake in 1838 ; but, even in its ruined state, is as 
large and imposing a mass of brickwork as is to be found 
anywhere.* Since the pyramids of Egypt, nothing so great 
has been attempted, and it belongs to uie 19th century! 

Belonging to the same century and in its way a remarkable 
building is the Kyauktaugyt temple at Amarapura, built in 
1847 A.D. by King Pagln Min on the model of the Ananda 
at Pag&n. The illustration (Plate XXXVIII.) shows that the 
temple is raised a few feet from the ground so as to allow of a 
broad flight of steps in front of the principal front, and that 
instead of the two ranges of windows on the ground storey, 
as in the Ananda, a re lofty doorways whic h give great import- 

^ * Misnon to the Court of Ava»* p. 169. 

* A view of thii tttin will be found in Vole’s ' Mission to Ava,’ piste 23. 



35 * 


FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


ance to the entrances. The five terraces and the .rikhara with 
finial which, with the Htt, crowns the structure are in their 
proportions and in the simplicity of the mouldings almost equal 
to those of the Ananda. It is quite certain that here in England 
any attempt to copy a cathedral of the same period as the 
Ananda in the nth century, such, for instance, as St Alban’s 
or Durham, would be a miserable failure compared with the 19th 
century example of the Kyauktaugyt temple in Amarapura. 

' Two other buildings might here be mentioned, firstly, the 
so-called Arakan pagoda, south of Mandalay, which was built 
by Bodauhpayft in 1785 to contain the brass statue of Gaudama 
carried ofiT by him from Arakan. It is really a square temple on 
the plan of the Ananda, with four great vestibules projecting on 
each side, the roof being a seven-storeyed pyAtthat in brick. 

And secondly the Kuthodaw or " thousand and one pagodas.” 
This consists of an immense zedi of the usual type, which wras 
built King Minddn Min, with three parallel rows round 
of small pagodas or shrines, all erected between 1857 and 
1864 to shelter the 729 marble slabs on which are engraved in 
Pili the Buddhist scriptures. The four entrance gates are evi- 
dently inspired by those of Cambodia, consisting of an entrance 
vestibule with side wings, the vestibule or hall being surmounted 
by a tower in two storeys set back one behind the other. 


Square Temples. 


The earliest example of the second class of pagoda with 
square plan and corridors in the thickness of the walls is that of 
Lemyet-hn 4 at Frome, attributed to the 8th and 9th centuries. It 
is alx>ut 24 ft. square and is built in brick with a solid pier 8 ft. 
square in the centre surrounded by a corridor 4 ft. wide ; on 
each face of the pier are bas-reliefs carved in stone which are 
lighted from four entrance doorways, one on each side of the 
temple. These doorways still preserve the arches built with 
radiating woussoirs of brick which, laid flatwise, dispensed with 
the n^ for centering. 

The sketch (Woodcut No. 449) shows that the bricks of the 


Burmese arches, which measure generally about 12 in. 

Av by 8 in. and 3 in. thick, formed a thin flat ring of 
voussoirs which, bedde'd in mortar, would remain in 
position till the ring was complete. This was the 
system employed in the vaulted passages leading to 
VteJ tombs in Egypt dating from 3500 B.C., in the drains of 
puimm Assyrian palaces, at a later date by the Sassanians 
‘of vM^rcd at Serbist&n, Firuz&Md and Ctesii^on in Persia, and 
is said to be found in Chinese Turkist&n. It is 


probable that the origin and development of these constructive 



Chap. I. 


SQUARE TEMPLES. 


353 


methods is due to the material employed, brick, which being of 
small dimensions necessitated a system of construction entirely 
different from that which obtained in India ^ and other countries 
where stone was in abundance. 

It would be a curious speculation to try and find out what 
the HindOs and Jains in western India would have done had 
th^ been forced to use brick instead of stone during the nth 
and 12th centuries, which was the great building epoch on the 
Irftwadt and in Gujar&t. Possibly they would have arrived at 
the same conclusion, in which case we can only congratulate 
ourselves that the westerns were not tempted with the fatal 
facility of bricks and mortar. 

It is, however, remarkable, considering the close connection 
between India and Burma, so far as architectural style is con- 
cerned, to find the arch and vault employed systematically 
throughout the latter countiy in buildings many of which are 
said to have been built by Indian workmen (though this term, 
may have been generally employed to signify a foreign origin), 
and further to note that those features appear only when they 
became an actual necessity, as in doorways requiring wide 
openings, or the covering over of corridors and small internal 
chambers with a permanent incombustible material to carry 
these roofs. It should here also be pointed out that those roofs 
were, as a rule, in the square temples, not flat terraces but 
assumed an ogee section following the rise of the vault. This is 
clearly shown in the Ananda (Plate XLI.), the Kyauktaugyt 
(Plate XXXVIII.), and in the Abhayad&na, south of Pa^n 
(Plate XXXVI.). In the latter illustration is shown on the 
left the side entrance doorway to the vestibule ; in this case 
there is only one ring of voussoirs, but there are other examples 
in which two concentric rings of voussoirs were employed. In 
the temple of Nathlaung-gyaung, built by Taungthugyt in the 
loth century, the upper ring is carried over the centre portion 
only of the lower ritig, the haunches of the arch up to two-thirds 
of the height being filled with brickwork laid in horizontal 
courses. As a rule the span of these arches is only about 6 ft., 
but in the temple of Payataung, in Old Prome, there is an arch 
of apparently about i6 ft. span in which there are three concentric 
rings of voussoirs. Although the Burmese architects fully 
recognised the constructive value of the arch, it does not appear 
to have been held in high esteem by them as a decorative 
feature, and in consequence they masked it by a coat of stucco 
as in the Abhayaddna pagoda (Plate XXXVI.), or by some 
applied decoration which in many cases has now fallen off, 

’ Of course excepting the arches in the tower at Bodh-GayS, which, in Feigusson’s 
opinion, were introauced by these very Burmese in 1305. Sec ante, vol i. pp. 77‘79- 



FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


3j4 

exposing the arched construction behind it An illustration 
of this can be seen in Plate II. of Yule’s work, representing 
the Temple of Sembyo Koo (TsAlAmani), where half of the 
applied decoration has fallen off the left hand side of the door* 
way. That which remains on the other side shows arched 
forms twisted into a variety of curves, which, like those of the 
window pediments of Nan Fayfl (Plate XXXIX.), have no con* 
structional value. The natural head of a niche sunk in the 
wall should either be a semicircular or pointed arch, but few 
of the niches in the corridors of the Ananda temple are thus 
ternxinated; th^r are generally shapeless and in a few cases 
are quatrolobed. In fact the Burmese would seem to be the 
only people who, having discovered the constructional value 
of the arch proper and known how to build it with radiating 
voussoirs, not only never employed it as a decorative feature, 
but seemed to be ashamed of its invention, and endeavoured 
to hide or mask it. 

In the vaulting over of these corridors, which in the Ananda 
temple are from 7 to 8 ft wide, the Burmese builders adopted 
a semi*pointed barrel vault, the section of which was similar 
to that of the flying buttress of a cathedral, except that it was 
rounded off at &e top. This vault, which arose from the outer 
to the inner wall of the corridor, was ,a much stronger form 
than that employed by the Romans with their semicircular barrel 
vaults, thou^ perhaps not of so agreeable a form. The adop- 
tion of the semi-pointed barrel vault (Woodcut No. 450) lessened 
the thrust, so that it is not surprising to find that nearly all 
these vaults exist down to the present day, suffering only 
.from the percolation of rain and the growth of trees and shrubs 
on the top. Over the central corridors or vestibules of the 
Ananda temple a pointed arch barrel vault is employed of 
siiAilar pitch to that shown in the woodcut (Na 453), represent- 
ing dre section of the Thatpyinnyu temple. Iii a section given 
by Foiphammer of the Dukkantein temple in Mrohaung, the 
upper Camber has a semicircular barrel vault, but there the 
walls were of great thickness. It has already been noticed 
that the roof of all these square temples was as a rule laid 
direct on the vault; this was the case with the Lemyet-hn& 
temple already mentioned, and in the B^b& temple, both in 
Prome, and also in the Patotbamya temple in die province of 
Myingyan, the two latter ascribed to the loth century. The 
form of these vaults and roofs are shown in Woodcut No. 450. 

The two most interesting temples of this class are those at 
Nan Pay& and NagAydn just south of P^n ; the first is con- 
sidered to have been built by King AnaurahtA about 1050 and 
the second by KyantsitthA in 1064. According to General de 



Chap. I. SQUARE TEMPLES. 355 

Beylin the plan of Nan Fay& is about ^ ft. square, with a 
central and four other piers inside, each measuring 6 ft 6 in. 
square, carrying the roof ; externally this is steppM back and 
in the centre is a square moulded plinth with a dormer window 
on each side through which light is thrown on to the images 
inside, the whole bong crowned with a jikhara. The temple 
is preceded by a vestibule 24 ft wide and 18 ft. deep, which 
is lighted by a window , on each side. On each of the other 
sides of the temple are three windows flanked by pilasters, 
carrying a pediment of enriched design (Plate XXXIX.) 
bearing considerable resemblance to those in Cambodia. The 
filling of the window is said to be in stone, which is the case 
in that of the Kyaukku temple, but in this case the jointing 
suggests a brick material. The plan of Nag&ydn is similar to 
that of Nan Payi, but there are five windows on each of the 
three sides. Greater importance is also given to the vestibule, 
which consists of central and side aisles, the former of greater 
height so that the section resembles that of a Christian church, 
without, however, any clerestory windows, the vestibule beit^ 
lighted by windows in the side aisles. 

Both of these temples are of considerable importance on 
account of the rich ornament carved externally and internally. 
The design and style of this ornament is similar to that which 
is found in the lower storey of the temple of Kyaukku in the most 
northern part of Pagfln. This was considered by Forchammer 
to be a remnant of North Indian Buddhism, which existed 
in Burma before the introduction of the Southern Buddhist 
school from Thatdn. Plate XXXIX. represents the rich type 
of ornament carved on the internal piers of Nan Pay&; the 
upper portion or frieze consists of gorgon heads or Ktrttimukhs 
carrying beaded festoons and pendants. This is repeated as 
an external frieze at the same temple, as also at Kyaukku and 
Nag&ydn. In later work, and more particularly as a decora- 
tion round the bell-shaped d&gabas of the zedis^ it is constantly 
employed. The decoration of the lower part of the pier 
(Plate XXXV.) consists of the gorgon head to a larger scale, 
carrying folii^ arranged to form a pendant, with bead 
pendants between. A somewhat similar decoration of pendants 
is found on pilasters — as on those of the window at Nan PayA 
(Plate XXXIX.) and on the angle pilasters of many of the 
great temples in Pagftn. The gorgon heads, beaded festoons 
and pendants are occasionally found on Chinese bronzes, easy 
of importation, so that it may have been from China or Lhisa 
that these decorative features were taken and reproduced, not 
only in Burma, but in Cambodia and J&va. 

The temples of Nan Payi and Nag&ydn are generally con- 



FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


356 

sidered to have been the prototypes of the Ananda, but, as has 
already been pointed out, the temples of Lemyet>hnft,Bil^pay 4 
and Patothamya, of still earlier date, have all the same plan, 
wjth internal corridors, from which it follows that there already 
existed, long before the conquest of Thatdn in 1057, a type 
of temple which was adopted by King Anauraht& as his model 
for the Ananda. It is, however, from this period that the 
great development took place in Burmese architecture result- 
ing in the magnificent series of examples not only of the 
square temples but of the pagodas, a development which lasted 
till the invasion of Pagftn by Kublai Kh&n in 1284, the last 
building of importance erected during this period being the 
pagoda of Mangalachetl, built by TarAk-pyemin about 1274 A.D.* 

Before passing on to a description of the principal temples 
at PagAn and the Burmese monasteries, there are two other 
classes of religious structures, the Thein and the Pitakat-Taik, 
which might here be included. 

The Thein or ordination hall for priests would seem to 
correspond with the Bdt of Siam, except that they are not 
as a rule found in the temple enclosure, as in the latter country, 
and there are very few examples. The Upali-Thein in PagAn, 
dating from the 13th century, is rectangular on plan and is 
dividra into nave and side aisles by arcades the arches of 
which are said to be well built. The centre aisle or nave is 
loftier than the side aisles, and in section the structure is 
similar to that of a Chaitya temple or of a Christian church, 
except that there are no clerestory windows. The summit 
of the roof is decorated with terra-cotta ridge tiles, arid in 
the centre is an attenuated dftgaba. On the top of the nave 
and aisle walls is a cresting or pierced parapet similar to 
tha t which crowns the terrace walls of the pagodas. The 
interior is said to be decorated with fine and brilliant frescoes. 
There is a second Thein at Pegu dating from 1476. 

The Pitakat-Taik or sacred library at PagAn was built by 
AnaurahtA in 1057 to house the Buddhist scriptures which he 
brought away from Thatdn. It was probably built by the 
masons whom he brought over from Thatdn, and was pre- 
sumably a copy of the original library there. The plan of 
the structure is square with apparently, judging from the roof, 
four parallel corridors round the central chamber or cell. 
The illustration (Plate XL.) shows that externally the ground 

> For an account of this temple and remarks, “il a eveill^ les conroitises 
its interesting enamelled tiles, see * Ver- d'arch^ologues pen scrupuleus gui en 
dffentlidtiingen aus dem Kdnigl. Museum ont arrach6 de nombreux has reliefs en 
Air VSlkeiknnde,’ Bd. V. (Berlin 1S97): faience.”— 'L’.^rchitecture llindone en 
de Be}'li£ calls it Sun Min Dgy, and Extreme Orient,’ pp. 259-261. 



Chap. I. 


THATON. 


357 


storey is of moderate height, and that the roof consists of 
four storeys, set back one behind the other, with ogee roofs 
between resting direct on the vaults of the corridors (see 
Woodcut No. 450). The antefixx and cresting above the 
eaves of the roof are apparently 
copies of the carved woodwork 
which is found on the PyStthat 
of a Kyaung or monastery, and in 
fact the whole structure bears some 
resemblance to a PyStthat when 
built in brick instead of in wood, 
except that it is only about half 
the height. The corridors are 
lighted through perforated stone 
windows on three sides. On the 
fourth or entrance front are three 
doorways with approaches between 
balustrades with carved termina- 
tions in front, like those in Fig. 455 
and 456. This suggests that in 
Thatdn the original library was 

raised a few feet above the ground 

as a precaution against inunda- ^50. section of Vault and Roof, 
tions, and that the masons who 

built this one reproduced the balustrade and termination in 
front of the doorways as a necessary approach. The feature 
crowning the building is called a dubika in the Burmese 
archaeological report, and is similar to the finial of the Py&tthat 
of the king’s palace at Mandalay (Woodcut No. 455). In 
later examples of the Pitakat-Taik and of the Shwe-daik or 
sacred treasury at Amarapura and Mandalay, the buildings 
are raised on a platform with flights of steps to the entrance 
door. They are either in one or two storeys, and with flat roofs. 

That6n or ThahtCn. 

The earliest really authentic notice we have of these 
countries is in the ' MahfLwansa.’ It is there related that, 
after the third convocation — B.C. 246 — Ajoka despatched two 
missionaries, Sono and Uttaro, to Suvarna-BhQmi, the Golden 
-Land, to carry the glad tidings of the religion of the Vanquisher.^ 
It is now perfectly ascertained that this place was almost 
certainly the Golden Chersonese of classical- geographers, 
situated on the Sittang river, and now called Thatdn, about 

* Tumour’s ‘Mah&wanao,’ p. 71. In Burma the two missionaries are known as 
Thawna and Uttara. 




FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


358 

forty mtjes’ travelling distance north from Martaban.^ Since 
it ceased to be a place of importance, either by the silting up 
of the river or the elevation of the land, it is now no longer 
a port; but there can be little doubt that for some centuries 
before and after the Christian Era it was the emporium through 
which a very considerable portion of the trade between China 
and the western world was carried on. The line of passage 
was apparently across the Bay of Bengal from the deltas of the 
Krishn& and Godlvar! ; and it was to this trade route that we 
probably owe the rise and importance of Amarftvatt till it was 
perhaps superseded by the direct sea-voy^e from GujarAt and 
the west coast of India in the 6th century. The place was 
sacked and entirely destroyed, according to Sir A. Phayre, 
about A.D. 1050, by AnaurahtA, King of ; but long before 
that time it had nxin dwindling, from the growing importance 
of Pegu or HansAwatt, which was founded about A.D. 633.' 

The only description of its ruins is by St Andrew St John, 
in the second volume of the * Phcenix ’ above referred to ; but 
they seem even now to be very extensive, in spite of neglect 
and consequent decay. The walls can still be traced for 7700 
ft in one direction by 4000 ft. in another, enclosing a r^ular 
oblong of more than 700 acres. In this enclosure are several 
old pagodas, some, unfortunately, recently repaired, but all of 
a form we have not yet met with, though we shall presently 
when we come to speak of JAva. 

The principal pagoda here, like all the others, is built of 
hewn laterite. Its base is a square, measuring 104 ft. .each 
way, and 18 ft. high ; the second storey is 70 ft. square and 
i 6 i ft high ; the third 48 ft. square and 12 ft high. On this 
now stands a circular pagoda, making up the whole height to 
85 ft. Mr. St John fancies this circular part may be much 
more modern than the rest, but he adds, “ the whole face of 
the ps^da has been carved in patterns ; but the most remark- 
able part is the second storey, to which access is given by four 
flights of steps, one in the centre of each face. The whole 
was apparently adorned with sculptures of the most elaborate 
character.” 

There seem to be no data to enable us to fix widi certainty 
the date of this or of other similar pagodas in this place, and 
no photographs to enable us to speak with certainty as to their 
details, which is to be regretted, as it is just in such an old 
city as this that we may expect to find those early forms which 

* R. F* St. John, in the * Phcenix,’ vol. ^ In 1116 Buddhavarsha ; — Sir A. 
ii. pp. a04, it siqq. Sir Arthur Phayre, l%ayre, * History of Burma,’ pp. 30 , 30 ; 
in ^ Joucftal of the Asiatic Society of P. W. Schmidt, * Bueh des K&jawan,’ 
Bengal,* vol. xlii. pp. 33, it aqq. pp* 3 o and zoi. 



Chap. I. 


PROME. 


359 


may explain so much that is now unintelligible in subsequent 
examples. Thatdn was coeval with Anur&dhapura in C^lon, 
and if examined with cate, might do as much for the square 
form of temple as the island capital may do for the round form. 
Their greatest interest would, however, arise from the light 
they might throw on the square temples of Pag&n and other 
Burmese cities, whose origin it has hitherto been impossible to 
explain. Meanwhile it is a fact worth bearing in mind that we 
find here square three-storeyed pagodas, which certainly were 
erected before A.D. 1080, when the city was destroyed, and 
possibly before the yth century, when it was practically super- 
seded by the rise of the new city and kingdom of Pegu. 

Prome. 

If we might trust the Burmese annals, Prome' was founded 
by a King DAttabaung as his capitd as early as the year 
lOi of Religion, or after the Nirvdna* of Buddha.* In other 
words, it seems to be assumed that Buddhist missionaries from 
the second convocation held under K&llroka, in the previous 
year, estoblished themselves here, and introduced the new 
religion into the country.' The real political capital of the 
countiy at that time seems to have been T^aung, half-way 
between Ava and Bhimo, on the Upper Irdwadi.* Prome, 
however, seems to have continued the religious capital till 
A.D. 107, when the two capitals were amalgamated, under the 
name of Old Pag^n on the northern site, to be again transferred 
to New Pag4n, below Ava, about the year 847.* Upper Pag&n 
seems to have been visited by Captain Hannay in A.D. 1835, 
and by others subsequently, and the remains are described as 
extensive, but too much ruined and obscured by jungle to 
admit of scientific investigation. 

Many of those at Prome have been photographed by the 
Government, and other illustrations are given in de Beylin’s 
book, together with the dates to which they are ascribed, those 
of de Beyli6 being earlier than others. Three of the pagodas. 


^ This is the European name, sit is 
called Pyt or Prl in Burmese. — Phayre, 
toe cit, p. 10. 

® Crawfurd’s ‘Embassy to Ava,’ vol. 
ii. p. 277. The “year of Religion” or 
“ Buddhavarsha ” era, like the Sinhalese 
era, dates from 543 B.c., but this reckon- 
ing appears to be of comparatively late 
origin, the earlier dates being reckoned 
from 482 B.C., so that the date here 
mentioned woidd belong to 382 B.c. — 
‘Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,’ 


1909, pp. 326ff. and 344f. The present 
Burmese Sakkar&j era commences in A.D. 

, on the sun’s entrance into Aries. 

The holding of this convocation 100 
I years after the death of Buddha is doubtful, 
and missionaries are mentioned only in 
connection with the Council hela by 
Asoka 218 years after the Nirvina, or 
in 246 B.C. 

^ Yule, ‘ Mission to Ava,’ p. 30. 

* Loe cit, p. 32. 



36 o further INDIA. Book VIII 

.the Baubaugyt, Payagyt and Payama, attributed to the yth and 
8th centuries, are by de Beylii put down as 6th century — 
certainly too early ; the square temple at Lemyet-hn&, also at 
Prome, is ascribed to the 9th century, that is to say, long before 
the introduction of the southern school of Buddhism from 
Thatdn. 


PagAn. 

Practically the architectural History of Burma begins with 
the foundation of Pag&n in the middle of the 9th century, and 
as it was destroyed by the Chinese, or rather the Tartar army 
of Kublai Kh&n, in 1284,' its glory lasted little more than four 
centuries. During that period, however, it was adorned by a 
very extensive series of monuments, most of which still remain 
in a state of very tolerable preservation. 

It will thus M observed that the rise and fall of Pagin are, 
as nearly as may be, coincident with that of Polonnaruwa, in 
Ceylon ; but the Burmese city seems to have excelled the 
Ceylonese capital both in the extent of its buildings and in 
their magnificence. Their differences, too, both in form and 
detail, are very remarkable, but, if properly investigated, would 
throw light on many religious and ethnographical problems 
that are now very obscure. 

The ruins of Pag&n extend about 8 miles in length along 
the river, with an average breadth of about 2 miles, and 
within that space Colonel Yule estimates there may still be 
traced the'remaiiis of 800 or 1000 temples. Several of these 
are of great magnificence, and are kept in a state of repair; but 
the bulk of them are in ruins, and the forms of the greater part 
hardly distinguishable. 

Of these, one of the most remarkable is the Ananda, built 
by Kyantsitth8 (1057-1085). As will be seen from the following 
plan (Woodcut No. 451), it is a square of nearly 200 ft. on each 
si,de, with projecting porticos on each face, so that it measures 
280 ft. across each way. Like all the great pagodas of the city, 
it is several storeys in height, the two lower ones are square 
with square turrets at each end, the three above have seated 
lions at each angle, as shown in Plate XLI. The plan of these 
storeys, as also the base of the rikhara, follows that of the latter, 
being set back at the angles for reasons which have already been 
suggested. The rikhara is crowned with the conical finial and 
Hti. The setting back of each storey one behind the other 
gives the whole a pyramidal form, which in this case rises to 
the height of 183 ft. 


’ Yule’s ' Marco I’olo,’ toI. ii. pp. 84, et stqg. 



Chap. I. 


PAGAN. 


361 


Internally, the building is extremely solid, being intersected 
onl^ by two narrow parallel corridors ; but in rear of each 
projecting transept is a niche artifidally lighted from above, 
in which stands a statue of Buddha more than 30 ft. in height 
This is the arrangement we find in the Chaumukh temple at 
Pilit^ni and at R&npur (Woodcut No. 288), both Jaina temples 
of the 15th and 17th centuries, and which it is consequently 
rather surprising to find here as early as the ilth century 
(A.D. 1066); but the form and the whole of the arrangement 



4SI. Plan ot Ananda Temple. (From Yule.) Scale loe ft. to i in. 

of these temples are so unlike what we find elsewhere that 
we must be prepared for any amount of anomalies. 

The plan of the Dhammayangyt built at PagAn by Narathfi 
in 1 160 A.D. is almost identical with the Ananda, but slightly 
larger, measuring 292 ft. across each way. With the exception 
of a deep recess facing the entrance in which the statue of 
Buddha is placed, the inner corridor has been bricked up. The 
other three statues are brought forward into . the vestibules 
of the other three transepts. Great similarities exist also in 
the design, there being two ranges of windows on the ground 
storey, one above the other, as in the Ananda. The roof con- 
sists of five storeys set back one behind the other, but being all 
of the same height are very monotonous in efifect, and are very 
inferior to the Ananda roof, where the three upper storqrs of 


36 * 


FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


less height give scale to the two lower ones ; only a portion of 
the rikhara remains. 

Next in importance to the Ananda is the Thatpyinnyu, “ the 
Omniscient,” erected about the year 1144 by Alaungslthd,^ the 

grandson of Anaurahtl 
It is very similar to the 
Ananda in dimensions 
and plan, except that it 
has only one great vesti- 
bule instead of four, and 
only one corridor on the 
ground storey, the centre 
portion being solid brick- 
work. The height of the 
temple is 201 ft, the 
highest in Pagin. The 
additional height in this 
temple, as also in that of 
the Gaudaupalin and 
Tstil&mani (the Sembyo 
Koo of Yule) temples, 
both built by Narapati- 
stthA in 1186 and 1196 
respectively, arises from 
an important change in 
the design. The third storey is raised to a height almost equal 
to that of the ground storey, and in the Thatpyinnyu temple, as 
shown in the section (Woodcut No. 453), contains a central cell 
and a corridor round. To this upper storey there are porches 
on each side, and on the entrance front a vestibule as well. The 
access by flights of steps to this is shown in the section taken 
from Yule, and horizontal terraces exist in place of the ogee 
roofs of the Ananda and Dhammayangyt temples. A similar 
access by external flights of steps opposite the porch existed 
op one of the sides of the Tsfll6mani, but not in the illustra- 
tibn (Plate XLII.), where the ramps have more the appear- 
ance of flying buttresses. This view suggests in its effect a 
resemblance to the portal of a French cathedral, and it gives 
some idea of the rich decoration employed. The three planes, 
or orders, as they are technically called, of the pointed arch 
recall the European subordination of arches, but the complicated 
assemblage of arched forms above in the gable end, all built in 
brick covered with stucco, show hpw this material lends itself to 



45a. Plan, of Thatpyinnyu. (From Yule,) 
‘‘ Scale xoo ft. to z in. 


^ Alattng^hfl, or AKingtslthd, reigned caused the temple of Bodh-Gayft to be 
from 1085 till 1 16a He restored Lety&- restored in 1105,— vol. i. p. 78. 
mengnftn to the throne of Arakan and 



Crap. I. 


PAGAN. 


363 


decoration of the most debased character. The decoration of 
the pilasters of the ground stor^ and the frieze which reigns 
throughout the same are repetitions of the ornament of the 
Nan Pay& and Kyaukku temples already described. The general 



appearance of these temples will be understood from the annexed 
view (Woodcut No. 454) of the Gaudaupalin and their general 
arrangement from the section of the Thatpyinnyu^ temple 

* In Pali Thatpyinnyn is SabljannA. 


453. Sectioo of Thatpyinnyu Temple. (From Yule.) Scale 50 ft. to i in. 


FURTHER INDIA. 


BookVIIL 


.^64 

(Woodcut Na 453). A design with slight modifications is shown 
in Plate XLIII., r^resenting the Thitsawada temple in Pwa'zaw 
(1080X Here the plmi is of smaller dimensions, but great hei^t 
is obtained by grouping the features closer together ; without 
looking too close at the detail, it is singular how close a 
res^blance these two views bear to a Spanish or Italian 
chiunih of the early Renaissance period. There is one other 
temple which should be mentioned here, viz., the Mah&baudi, 
built -t^ Nandaungmya Min in -1198 a.d. in imitation of the 



454. View of the Temple' of Gaudaupalin. (From Yule. ) 


Bo^>Gay& temple in Bengal {antet vol. i. Woodcut No. 19). 
The temple is square, having a lofty ground stor^, with two or 
three ranges of windows or niches ; in the centre, but set back 
to leave a terrace round, is a lofty pyramidal tower in seven 
stores, bearit^ a close resemblance to those of the Bodh-Gay&, 
but with small dormer windows in the centre of each side ; the 
tower is crowned with the usual finial and Htt. It is the only 
example of its kind in Burma, and does not seem to have any 
influmice on subsequent examples. 

The first thii^ that strikes the enquirer on examining these 
temples is their remarkable dissimilarity with anything on the 
continent of India. They are not stflpas in any sense of the 
term, nor are they vihdras. The one building we have hitherto 
met vdth which mey in anv way resemble is the seven>stor^ed 
Pidalda at Polonnaruwa (Woodcut No. 137X which, no doubt, 
belongs to the same class. It wta thought that the square 


Chap. I. 


MONASTERIES. 


365 


pagodas at Thatdn, when properly examined, may contain the 
explanation we are searching' for. They evidoitly were not 
alonc^ and many other examples may still he ^nd when 
looked for. On the whole, however, I am inclined to believe, 
improbable as it may at first sight appear, that their real 
synonyms are to be found in Babylonia, not in India. The 
Birs Nimrfid was, like them, a seven-storied temple, with 
external stairs, leading to a crowning cell or sanctuary. Of 
course, during the seventeen centuries which elapsed between 
the erection of the two buildings, considerable changes have 
taken place. The lowest stairs in Burma have become internal ; 
in Babylonia they were apparently external. At the head of 
the third flight at the Birs, Sir Henry Rawlinson found the 
remains of three recesses. At Pag&n these had been pushed 
into the centre of the third storey. The external flights were 
continued on the upper three storeys at both places ; but in 
Babylonia they lead to what seems to have been the real 
sanctuary, in Burma to a simulated one only, but of a form 
which, in India, always contained a cell and an image of the 
deity to whom the temple was dedicated. 

It may be asked. How is it possible that a Babylonian form 
should reach Burma without leaving traces of its passage through 
India? It is hardly a sufficient answer to say it must have 
come vtd Tibet and Central Asia ; because, in the present state 
of our knowledge, we do not know of such a route being used. 
It is a more probable explanation to say that such monuments 
may have existed in the great Gangetic cities, but, like these 
Burmese examples, in brick and plaster; and have perished, 
as they would be sure to do in that climate, and where hostile 
races succeeded the Buddhists. But, however it may be 
eventually accounted for, it hardly appears to me doubtful that 
these Burmese seven-storeyed temples are the lineal descendants 
of the Babylonian examples, and that we shall some day be 
able to supply the gaps which exist in their genealogy. 

Meanwhile one thing must be borne in mind. The earliest 
capital of the Burmese was Tagaung in the north, and their 
real affinities are with the north. They got their religion by 
the western route from Bengal, but it was engrafted on a stem 
of which we know very little, and all whose sanities have yet 
got to be traced to their source. 

Monasteries. 

As Burma is a country in which the monastic system of 
Buddhism flourishes at the present day to the fullest extent, 
if we had more information regarding its monasteries, or 
fyauf^s as they are called, it might enable us to understand the 



FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


366 

arrangement of the older ones. The travellers who have visited 
the country have been silent on the subject, principally because 
the mmiasteries are, in almost all instances, less magnificat 
than the pagodas to which they are attached, and are, with 
scarcely an exception, built of wood — a practice destructive of 
their architectural character, and also depriving them wholly 
of ^at monumental appearance of stability which is so essential 
to true architectural expression. 

This peculiarity is not confined to the monasteries; all 
i^sidences, from that of the poorest peasant to the palace of the 
king, having been constructed from time immemorial of this 
perishable material. The custom has now passed into a law, 



455, Burmese Kyaung. (From Col. Symes * Embassy io Ava.*) 


that no one shall have the power of erecting buildings of stone 
or brick, except it be the king himself, or unless the edifices 
be of a purely religious character. Even this exception is not 
always taken advantage of, for the king’s palace itself is as 
essentially a wooden erection as the dwelling of any of his 
subjects. It is, however, not the less magnificent on this account 
— ^rather, perhaps, more so— immense sums being spent on the 
most elaborate carvings, and the whole being lacquered, painted, 
and g?lt, to an extent of which we have no conception in our 
mote sober clime. 

The general appearance of the facade may be realised from 
the annexed view (Woodcut No. 456) ; but its real magnificence 


Chap. I. 


MONASTERIES. 


367 


consists in the profusion of gilding and carving with which every 
part is covered, and to which it is impossible to do justice on 
so small a scale. 

The same profuse decorations are bestowed upon the monas- 
teries, one of which is represented in the annexed wood^t 
(No. 455), showing a building in which all the defects arising 
from the use of so easily carved a material are carried to excess. 



456. Fa9ade of the King's Palace, Burma. (From a Sketch by Col. Yule.) 


If the colouring and gilding could be added, it would represent 
a building such as the West never saw, and, let us hope, never 
will see; for, however dazzling its splendour, such barbaric 
magnificence is worthy only of a half-civilised race. 




368 FURTHER INDIA. Book VIII. 

The naked form of these monasteries — if the expression 
may be used — ^will be understood from the following woodcut 
(Nq. 457) of one erected at Mandalay. It is apparently five 
stor^ in height, but as a matter of fact only one storey is 
occupied, the first, or “piano nobile” as we would call it. The 
reason for this being that the P6ngyi or priest would refuse to 
reside in a building where any one’s feet were above his head. 
The first storey of a Kyaung, and this applies to the example 
at Mandalay, is always raised about 8 to lo ft. above the 
ground, being carried on great timber posts. It is surrounded 
by a balcony on three sides, access to which is obtained by 
flights of steps enclosed between balustrades with a peculiar 



curved termination in front, shown in the woodcut (No. 455). 
The steps, the walls carrying them and the balustrades are all 
in brick, whilst the rest of the structure is entirely in timber. 
On the eastern side is a shrine, in which is a statue of Gaudama, 
above which is the Pyfttthat, a lofty structure with three, five 
or seven roofs according to the importance of the Kyaung; 
thus in the Royal monasteries and the King’s Palace there 
are seven roofs, as in Woodcut No. 456. The monastery at 
Mandalay (Wo^cut No. 457) was not completed when the 
photograph was taken, but not being masked by the daborate 
carving as shown in Woodcut No. 455, the scheme of its 
design is easier to read. There are four storeys of roofs, the 
upper one covers a lantern only; the roof below covers the 



Chap. I. MONASTERIES. 369 

central hall which is enclosed with double aisles all round 
covered over by the two other roofs. Virtually there is only 
one room in a Burmese Kyaung, at the east end ; and next to 
the PyStthat is the Pdngyi’s quarter, where he receives visitors, 
teaches in the school and sleeps; at the west end are the 
students’ quarters and the store-rooms, and the school-room, 
if it may be so termed, is in the central hall.^ 

These many-storeyed kyaungs, with the tall seven-storeyed 
spires (shown in Woodcuts Nos. 447 and 455), bring us back to 
the many-storeyed temples in Nep&l, which are in all essential 
respects so nearly identical, that it can hardly be doubted they 
had a common origin. We are not yet in a position to point 
out the connecting links which will fuse the detached fragments 
of this style into a homogeneous whole, but it is probably in 
China that they must be looked for, only we know so little of 
the architectural histoiy of the western portion of that great 
country, that we must wait for further information before even 
venturing on this subject. 

The met that all the buildings of Burma are of wood, except 
the pagodas, may also explain how it is that India possesses 
no architectural remains anterior to the age of Aroka. Except 
the comparatively few masonry pagodas, none of which existed 
prior to his era, there is nothing in Burma that a conflagration 
of a few hours would not destroy, or the desertion of a few 
years entirely obliterate. That the same was the practice of 
India is almost certain, from the essentially wooden forms still 
found prevailing in all the earlier cave temples ; and, if so, this 
fully accounts for the disappearance of all earlier monuments. 

We know that wooden architecture was the characteristic of 
Media, where all the constructive parts were formed in this 
perishable material ; and from the Bible we learn that Solomon’s 
edifices were chiefly so constructed. Persepolis presents us 
with the earliest instance remaining in Asia of this wooden 
architecture being petrified, as it were — apparently in conse- 
quence of the intercourse its builders maintained with Egypt 
and with Greece. 

In Burma these wooden types still exist in more complete- 
ness than, perhaps, in any other country. Even if the student 
is not prepated to admit the direct ethnographic connection 
between the buildings of Burma and Babylon, he will at any 
rate best learn in this country to appreciate much in ancient 
architecture, which without such a living illustration, it is hard 
to understand. Solomon’s House of the Forest of Lebanon 

• Yule’s ‘ Mission to .\va,' pp. 3S4-35S-— Ph«y« in • Jour. Asiat Soc. Bengal,’ 
vol. xxix. pp. 346 iT. 



37 * 


FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


is, with mere difference of detail, reproduced at Ava or 
Amarapura; and the palaces of Persepolis are rendered 
infinitely more intelligible by the study of these edifices. 
Burma is almost equally important in enabling us to under- 
stand what an active, prosperous Buddhist community may 
have been in India at a time when that religion flourished 
there ; ^ and altogether, if means were available for its full 
elucidation, it would form one of the most interesting chapters 
in the History of Architecture in Asia. 

^ For a succinct account of the history Burma including Burma proper, Pegu 
of Burma to 1837, the raider may consult Taungu, Tcnasserim, and Arakan.’ 

Sir Arthur P. Phayre*s * History of 



CHAPTER II. 


CAMBODIA. 


CONTENTS. 

Introductory — The various classes of temple and their disposition— -Temples 
of Angkor Vit, Angkor Thom, Beng Mdjilei, Ta Prohm, Banteai Kedei, 
Prah-khan, etc. — Palaces and Civil Architecture. 


The King Builders} 


Jayavarman II. 
Jayavarman III. 
Indravannan 
Yajovarman. 
Hardiavarman I. 
Ijftnavarman 
Jayavarman IV. 
Harshavarman II. 
Rijendiavarman 



Approximate 

Dates. 

A.D. 8 o 2 


„ 869 


>. 877 


„ 889 


(?) .. 9«o 


(?) .> 9*8 


; 9*8 

!. 

» 94* 

• 

.. 944 


Jayavarman V. . 
Siiryavarman I. . 
Uday&dityavarman 
Harshavarman III. 
Jayavarman VI. . 
Dharantndravarman I. 
Sdiyavarman II. . 
Dhamntndcavarman II 
Jayavarman VII. 


Approximate 

Dates. 

A. O. 968 
1002 
1049 
(?) I0^» 

(?) 1090 

(?) 1108 

III2 

(?) 1 15* 

1162-1201 


Since the exhumation of the buried cities of Assyria by Mons. 
Botta and Mr. Layard nothing has occurred so startling, or which 
has thrown so much light on Eastern art, as the discovery of 
the ruined cities of Cambodia. Historically, they are infinitely 
less important to us than the ruins of NimrOd and Nineveh ; 
but, in an architectural point of view, they are more astonishing ; 
and, for the elucidation of certain Indian problems, it seems 
impossible to overrate their importance. 

The first European who visited these ruins in modern times 
was M. Mouhot, a French naturalist, who devoted the last four 
years of his life (1858-1861) to the exploration of the valleys of 
the Me-kong and Me-nam rivem. Though the primary object 
of his travels was to investigate the natural productions of the 
countiy, he seems to have been so struck with the ruins of 
Angkor VAt that he not only sketched and made plms of them, 
but wrote descriptions of all the principal buildings. Unfortun* 
ately for science and art he never returned to Europe, being 
struck down by fever while prosecuting his researches in the 
northern part of the country ; and, though his notes have been 
published both in tliis country * and in France! th^ were not 


* Aymonier, ‘ Le Cunbodge,’ tome-iii. p. 539. 

* * Travels in Indo-China, Cambodia, and I.aos,* by Henri Mouhot. 2 volt. 
8vo. Murray, 1864. 



37a 


FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


prepared for publication by himself, and want the explanatory 
touches which only an author can give to his own work. 
Though his melancholy death prevented M. Mouhot from 
obtaining all the credit he was entitled to for his discovery, it 
has borne rich fruit as far as the public are concerned. 

The next person who visited these ruins was the very 
learned Dr.' Adolph Bastian ; ^ who wrote a most recondite but 
very unsatisfactoiy work on the Indo-Chinese nations, in five 
volumes. 

The next visit was paid by Mr. J. Thomson, a professional 
photographer at Singapore, who at considerable expense and 
risk carried his photographic apparatus to the spot, and brought 
away a plan of the great temple at Angkor Vit, with some 
thirty photographs of it, besides views of other places in the 
neighbourhood. 

Since that time the French have sent a succession of well- 
equipped expeditions to the place; the first, under Captain 
Doudart de Lagr^e in 1866 and a second in 1873. His 
unfortunate death on the frontiers of China prevented his ever 
working out his results to the extent he no doubt would have 
done had he lived to return home. They were, however, 
published as he left them by Lieutenant T. Gamier, the second 
in command, with notes and additions of his own.’’ 

As they, however, could hot complete the investigation, 
a third expedition was fitted out under Captain L. Delaporte, 
who had taken part in the previous expeditions. He returned 
to France in 1 874, bringing with him not only detailed plans of 
some of the temples, but copies of numerous inscriptions and 
a lai^ collection of antiquities and casts. These were at first 
located in the Chateau of Compi^gne, but were afterwards 
removed to Paris and arranged in the Trocadero Museum. 

Captain Delaporte’s work ^ was published in 1880. He was 
followed by other travellers who shortly after their return 
brought out the results of their investigations, M. T. Moura,^ 
A. Tissandier,^ Fourriereau,® Captain E. Lunet de Lajonqui^re,^ 


^ * Die Volker der Oestlichen Asien,’ 
von Dr. A. Bastian. Leipzig, 1866. 
He also wrote an account of the ruins in 
the 'Journal of the Royal Geographical 
Society’ (vol. xxxv.), and four ^pers 
in the 'Ausland* (Nos. 47-50). 

s 'Voyage d’Exploration en Indo- 
Chine/ 2 vols. quarto and folio Atlas of 
plates. Paris, 1073 ; also ' Explorations et 
Missions: Extraits de ses Manuscripts/ 
par M. A. B. Villemereul. Paris 1883. 

^ 'Voyage au Cambodge,!’ Architecture 


khinere.’ 410. z88o. 

* ' Le Royaumede Cambodge.’ 2vols. 
8vo. 1883. 

^ 'Cambodge et Java: Ruines khmeres 
et javanaises, 1893-94.’ 410. 1896. 

Les Ruines d’ Angkor.’ 4to. 1900. 

' 'Allas Archeolocique de I’lndo- 
Chine: Monuments du Champa et du 
Cambodge/ fol. 1901 ; * Inventaire 

arch^ologique et descriptif des Monu- 
ments du Cambodge.* 2 vols. Imp. 
8vo. 1902-1907. 



Chap. II. 


CAMBODIA. 


373 


and K Aymonier,^ all of whom were sent out by the Minister 
of Public Instruction and under the direction of the Ecole 
Frangais de I’Extrdme Orient The latest writer on the subject 
is General L. de Beylin,’ whose work includes a description with 
illustrations of the monuments of India, Burma, Cambodia, 
Siam, J&va, and Ceylon. 

In addition to these sources of information there is a most 
interesting account, written by a Chinese traveller, who spent 
two years in the country when the kingdom was in its most 
flourishing state between the years 1295-97. He was a 
Buddhist, and, like his predecessors in India, Fah Hian and 
Hiuen Tsiang, sees things a little too much through Buddhist 
spectacles ; but, with this slight defect, nothing can be more 
graphic than his account of the country and the people.’ 

One of the earliest traditions is that first put forward by 
Dr. Bastian * relative to the migration of an Indian prince, and 
this is repeated by Tissandier,’ who states that in 443 B.C. 
Prea-thong, a Hindu prince, son of the King of Indraprastha, 
emigrated with a large number of his followers and settled at 
Choukan (north of Angkor). The new emigrants introduced 
the Brfthman rites which were engrafted on those of the 
Serpent worshippers of the country. Although at first they 
settled down amicably with the original inhabitants, in course 
of time troubles set in and the Indians, having vanquished their 
opponents, became masters of the country. In 125 B.c. the 
Chinese are said to have conquered the Cambodians and forced 
them to pay tribute. There is also a record that in the first 
centuries of our era emigrants from Madras made their way 
into Cambodia introducing the Brihman faith, the Sanskrit 
alphabet, and Indian rites and customs.’ The Khmer and 
Sanskrit epigraphic texts give details of a dynasty of seven 
kings who reigned from 435-680 A.D., among whom a certain 
Bhavavarman seems to have been a great conqueror ; the last 

^ * Le Cambodge.' 3 vols. Imp. 8vo. kingdoms : — (i) Yavana-deia in the 
190X>I907. The Sanskrit inscriptions north-east, extending from the gulf of 
were translated and commented by M. M. Tongkin westwards nearly to the 99th 
A. Barth and Abel Bergaigne, with atlas meridian, and including much of the 
of phototypes of the estampages. Paris Laos districts north of 17” 30'. Its 
1885 and 1893. capital was Chudh^agarl, now Luang 

^ *L’ Architecture Hindoue en Extreme Phrabang on the Me-kong. (2) Champft- 
Orient.’ 1907. dem, corresponding to Annani and 

* The work is translated m extenso in extending to about 160 miles westwards 

Abel Remusat’s * Nouveaux Melanges of the Me-kong. (3) Sayam-dexa in the 
Asiatiques,’ vol. i. pp. 78 x/ xxyy. north-west, including Burma proper and 

* ^tian, /oc, cit, vol. i. p. 393. the northern part of modem Siam east of 

* Tismdier, loc, cit, p. 17. the Sal win, of which Haripunyapura,now 

* From ancient inscriptions we learn Lamphum on the Me-ping, was — if not 
that the Eastern peninsula at an early the capital — one of its notable cities, 
date included six regions, states or (4) Kambuja~dexa included all Cambodia. 



374 


FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


of this dynasty was Jayavarman. From his death to the 
commencement of the 9th century there are no records, owing 
probably to internal dissensions, but in 802 A.D.^ Jayavarman II., 
who may have been a descendant of the older dynasty, formed 
a new dynasty of eighteen sovereigns, a list of whom, with the 
dates of their accessions, are given at the head of this chapter. 
To this monarch is attributed the foundation of the Cambodian 
kingdom, whose capital was' Angkor Thom, situated in the 
valley of the Me-kong about 14 miles north of the lake known 
as Tonl^ Sap! Jayavarman II. settled at first at Prah-khan 
north of Angkor VHt, and in the tenth year, of his reign is 
supposed to have laid the foundations of the great city of 
Angkor Thom, as also those of the Royal palace in its centre, 
the pyramid temples of Phimeanakas, the great temple of Bayon 
and other structures. To him, therefore, according to Aymonier,^ 
must be ascribed the inauguration of those colossal construc- 
tions which were raised during the four centuries following and 
which constitute the great Cambodian style. There are some 
small earlier temples built towards the end of the 6th or the 
commencement of the yth centuries, in which the origin of 
the style may be found, but they are of comparatively small 
importance. It is, however, interesting to note that according 
to Aymonier, Jayavarman may have come into the country 
from J&va, and therefore brought over some acquaintance with 
the great temple of Boro-Budur of the 7th or 8th centuries, to 
which there is a striking resemblance, so much so that somf of 
the sculptures of the latter have been assumed in error to be 
those of Angkor Vftt. 

The third king, Indravarman, besides building the temples 
of Baku and Bakong, completed and consecrated the temple 
of Bayon in Angkor Thom, the .chef efeeuvre of Cambodian 
architecture. The erection of the great capital, on account of 
its magnitude and the numerous temples and other structures 
it contained, would seem to have stretched over a long period, 
as it was not until the reign of Yarovarman, the fourth king, 
that the official capital was shifted about 900 A.D. from 
Hariharlllaya, which, since the death of the first king, had 
hitherto held that position, to Angkor Thom. To Yamvarman 
is attributed also the temple of Lolei and the pyramid temple 
of Phim^nakas in the centre of the Palace enclosure. He is 
said to have been a man of prodigious strength, but in about 

Lower Cochin China and Siam as fai Adcien/ pt. i, pp. sofT. 
north as Uttaradih (Lat. 17"* 39' N.)* ^ I'he dates are those taken from the 

(5) Karoonya-dera, on the west, com- Indian 5 aka, to which is added 78 : thus 

prised Pegu and Tenasserim.' And (6) 724 ^aka is 802 a.d. 

The Malay peninsula was designated ^ Aymonier, loc. cU. tome iii. p. 46S. 
Malaya-deja, — Foumereau, * Le Siam 



Chap. II. 


CAMBODIA. 


375 


the nineteenth or twentieth year of his reign was afflicted with 
leprosy and retired to a forest in the north of the kingdom, 
leaving two sons to succeed him, the second of whom, Ir&na- 
varman, left Angkor Thom about 926 A.D. and settled at Chok 
Gargyar (Kohker >), which became the capital during his reign 
and that of his son. The ninth king, Riljendravarman, returned 
to Angkor Thom in 942, and it was in his reign that Buddhism 
commenced to be favoured, one of the two great temples built 
by him, Ta>Prom being Br&hman, and the other, Bftnt^ai 
Kedei, Buddhist. Under the reign of his successor many other 
temples were erected, of which the most important is the 
pyramid temple of Bapuon, immediately south of the Royal 
Palace in Angkor Thom. The eleventh king, SOryavarman, 
reigned forty-eight years, and was a great builder, the temples 
of Phnom Chisor (Prov. B&ti), Vit Ek near Battambang, Phnom 
Bdset, Prah Vihear (Prov. Kukhan) and Prah-khan (Kompong 
Svay), being attributed to him. His successor continued his 
work and built the temples of Banteai Ta Kean (Prov. 
Siemreap), Phimai (Prov. Korat), Prfi Rup, and probably the 
temple on Mount Bakhdng, south of Angkor Thom. The 
dates of the accessions of the three, following kings are not 
known for certain, and with the exception of Vit Phu at 
Pursat, built about 1090-1100, restorations and additions only 
are recorded during the period of their reigns. We pass on, 
therefore, to Sfiryavarman II., who is said to have extended 
to its normal condition the empire which had suffered many 
calamities under his predecessors. He would appear to have 
been not only a great warrior, but a remarkable scholar and 
writer of verses, and to him is attributed the erection of the 
temple of Angkor Vat, the foundation of which is said to have 
been laid by his predecessor, but which he continued and com- 
pleted during the forty years of his reign, including the magni- 
ficent series of bas - reliefs which are carved on the walls 
representing battle scenes taken from the R4m&yana. During 
the reign of the last two sovereigns of the dyflasty, commenced 
the wars with neighbouring nations, and no further temples were 
built, so that our architectural history is confined to the three 
and a half centuries which elapsed ^tween 802 and 1152. 

It was to these incessant wars that the decadence of 
Cambodia must be attributed ; commencing with the Champis 
(Cochin China), continued by the Peguans and subsequently 
with the Siamese, Cambodia was invaded and devastated, 
Angkor Thom being taken after a seven months’ siege in 
1375 and again in 1460, when the capital was changed 
successively to various other towns, the last settlement being 

* Lai. 13® 15' N., long. 104® 31' E. 



376 


FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


at Phnom Penh ^ on the Me-kong, the present capital of what 
remains of the great Cambodian kingdom. 

Temples. 

Broadly speaking, the temples, the relative position of 
which is shown in Woodcut No. 458, may be divided into four 
classes: firstly, those in which the enclosures, generally three 
in number, are all more or less on the same level, such as in 
the temples of Ta Prohm, Kedei, and Trt Rup ; secondly, the 
pyramid temples, which consist of a series of narrow terraces 
rising one above the other as PhimSanakas and Bapuon ; thirdly, 
those in which the two first classes would seem to be combined, 
where the enclosures, one within the other, are each raised from 
15 to 20 ft above the level of that outside, so as to give the 
whole a pyramidal form, such as in those of Angkor V&t and 
Bayon ; and fourthly, the smaller temples, consisting of three or 
five sanctuaries placed side by side, the centre one being the 
most important, the whole surrounded by a wall or moat. The 
enclosures consist either of a moat within which may have been 
some kind of timber palisade now gone, or a stone wall 8 to 
10 ft. high, with cre.sting at the top. In a large number of 
temples one or more of the enclosures take the form of a gallery 
or corridor, which is roofed over with horizontal courses of stone 
corbelled over till they meet at the top. The nature of this 
construction limits the width of the corridor to 7, or at the 
utmost 10 ft, so that if a greater width is required, an aisle 
is provided on one or both sides. An example of this is shown 
in Woodcut No. 461, a section of the corridor at Angkor V4t 
In this case the support on the left consisted of a solid wall, 
the roof over the aisle being at a lower level than that over the 
corridor, but there are instances in which this system of con- 
struction is employed over the vestibules and halls leading to 
a sanctuary, in which case the outer supports are walls, the 
inner ones piers, constituting in plan what might be described 
as a nave and aisles. 

The approaches to the temples acquire considerable import- 
ance, not only on account of their great length, but because they 
consist of causeways raised from 10 to 12 ft. above the ground, 
necessitated by the fact that from June to October fhe valley of 
the Me-kong, where all the more important Cambodian temples 
are found, is flooded, and the raised causeways form the only 
means of communication between the towns and temples : the 
whole valley, in fact, is mapped out with roads arranged at right 
angles to one another, along which the caravans pass. 

fn the approaches to the principal temples and the great 
* Lat. II* S 3 ' N., long. 104* 57' E. 



Chap. II. CAMBODIA— TEMPLES. 377 

towns, these causeways have led to features which are confined 
to Cambodia, viz., the cruciform terraces (such as that shown 



458. Map showing the position of the principal Ttimples. 


in Woodcut No. 459, in front of the temple of Angkor V 4 t, and 
in Woodcut No. 470 in the foreground of the temple of Beng 
M6alei), the bordering of the causeways with steles, lions, and 
other animals, and, when crossing the moats, to stone bridges 
the balustrades of which consisted of serpents carried by 




378 


FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


giants on sculptured pedestals, the serpent terminating at the 
entrai^ce end by a lofty NAga figure lo to 12 ft. high, with 
from five to seven heads. A similar feature terminates the 
balustrades of bridges across rivers or streams, an example of 
which, the Spean Taon, is shown on Plate XLIV., Fig. 2. In the 
latter case the bridge is carried on great stone piers corbelled 
out at the top, the banks being widened out so as to give an equal 
passage to the torrent as that enjoyed before the bridge was 
built Across the moats which surround the outer enclosure 
of the temples, the bridge is carried on circular or compound 
piers, sometimes carrying side walls enriched with N&ga figure 
sculpture. 

In front of the temples and also in parts of the enclosure are 
tanks of water known as sras, with stone borders and steps 
round. These provide for the services of the temple ; there are 
some cases in which these sras are of enormous dimensions, 
forming reservoirs to supply water for agricultural and other 
purposes.' 

The principal approach to the temples is, as a rule, from the 
east, unless, as in the case of Angkor VSt, where there is some 
special reason for the change, the main road from the capital 
Angkor Thom being on the west side of the former, which has 
accordingly a western entrance. The entrance gateways to the 
several endosures are called gopuras ^ and are cruciform on plan, 
owing to projecting wings thrown out on all four sides : the side 
wings being of greater length than the others, in some cases, as 
at Angkor V&t, having a second entrance on each side. Over 
the centre of the gopura is a tower which in the entrance gate- 
way of Angkor Thom is carved on each side with BrahmS heads. 
The gopura is repeated for the entrance of each enclosure, always 
being in the centre of the east and west fronts, but on the north 
and south fronts nearer to the west end, where the main entrance 
is on the eastern side, and to the cast end if on the western side ; 
the reaSon being to provide additional space for other structures 
'within the enclosures on the entrance side, the axis of the 
sanctuary and of the gopura being always the same. 

In the pyramidal temples and in those of the third class, where 
each terrace or enclosure rise$ from 1 5 to 20 ft, the staircases 
are very steep— in some cases the rise of the steps being three 
times the width of the tread. The steps are enclosed between 
projecting spurs or ramps of stone, which are richly moulded and 
carved, and the width of each flight is of less dimension as it 
rises, so as to give the appearance of greater height In some 
of the large temples — in addition to the towers over the central 

' De Lajonqnierii * Inventabe archi- | ^ Lot. cit, introd. pp. 

ologiqne,’ tome i. mtrod. pp. 43(1. 



Chap. II. 


CAMBODIA— TEMPLES. 


379 


and side entrances — ^there are others over the angles of each 
enclosure ; and in the temple of Bayon, including those of the 
sanctuary and other buildings within the enclosure, there are as 
many as fifty towers, — ^that over the sanctuary rising to a height 
of 130 ft. above the central enclosure or platform, the latter being 
34 ft. above the ground outside. The principal characteristic of 
the design in the Cambodian temples consists in the accumula- 
tion of features ; thus the sanctuary, for instance, originally a 
square tower of the same height as width, with a series of five 
storeys, one above the other, diminishing in size as they rise, 
and crowned with the lotus flower, has l^n enriched with one 
or two slightly projecting bays on each face, in front of which 
elaborately carved doorways have been added ; similar project- 
ing bays and doorways, of less dimensions as they rise, are 
carried up each storey of the tower. The general effect of this 
accumulation of features may be judged by Woodcut No. 464, 
where the two rising roofs of the corridors add to those features 
above described, and in the view (Plate XLV.) of the gopura 
to the sanctuary enclosure of the temple of Prah-khan (Prov. 
Kompong Svay). The two upper stages of the tower over 
the gopura are gone, but on the left hand side there are four 
repetitions of the serpent gables over the doorways, such as 
are more clearly shown in Plate XLIV., Fig. i. 

Although to each enclosure there are four gopuras or entrance 
gateways, those on the north and south are invariably closed 
with imitation doors in stone. Similar false doorways, some- 
times elaborately carved, are found on the three sides of the 
sanctuary, the east or, in some instances, the west doorway 
being the only entrance. The sanctuary is always situated on 
the axis of the principal entrance, and, owing to the project- 
ing bays added to each side, presents a cruciform plan. In 
general design the sanctuary takes the form of a tower or 
.rikhara, the lower portion rarely higher than the width but 
crowned with a .series of receding stages ; the walls are of great 
thickness, sometimes 5 to 6 ft. deemed necessary to carry the 
superstructure which was built with horizontal courses of stone 
or brick, corbelled out internally so as to meet in the centre. 
No trace of an arch of any description has ever been found in 
Cambodian architecture ; so that corbelling out with horizontal 
courses of stone was the only expedient employed to roof over 
their corridors, sanctuaries, or other halls. The widest span 
never exceeds 10 ft, and to increase the width of a hall or 
vestibule, often found in front of a sanctuary, aisles are added : 
this applies to all temple buildings, the roofs of which would 
seem always to have been of stone. In secular buildings, tinaber 
roofs, none of which exist at the present day, were almost certainly 



FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


380 

employed, as remains have been found of parallel walls of a 
much neater width. In the inner enclosure of a temple, on each 
side of the central axis, and in front of the sanctuary, two other 
stimctures are invariably found, which are assumed to have been 
the treasury for the deposit of the sacred vessels and other 
properties of the temple and the library for the records ; their 
entrance doors face the opposite direction to those of the 
sanctuary; they are lighted by rectangular window openings 
closed with balusters such as shown in Plate XLV. ; the sills 
of the windows of the treasury or library are always about 6 ft 
from the ground, and the same is found in other buildings, 
which are assumed to have been occupied by the women. 
In some of the temples there are other structures in the rear 
of the sanctuary;^ thus at Phnom Chisor (Prov. B8ti)* are 
live buildings of different sizes and similar in general design, 
all having doorways facing east which are undoubtedly shrines 
for divinities of the same cult, whether 5 aiva or Vaishnava. 
The temple of Phnom Chisor is built on an eminence, and is 
approached by long causeways with numerous flights of steps, 
there being in front of thegopura a flight of 392 steps ; a second 
example exists in the Prah Vihear,* where the temple is built on 
a cliff which in Europe would have been selected for a strongly 
fortified castle. 

The thrbO largest templds in Cambodia are those of At^kor 
V8t, Bayon and Beng M6aleft ; of these the first named is the 
best preserved, though of later date, the other two being built at 
a period when the architectural style of Cambodia had reached 
perhaps its highest development. 

TEMPLE OF ANGKOR vAt. 

The temple of Angkor VHt, literally “ the temple of the city,” 
is situated about a mile to the southward of the city of Angkor 
Thom itself, and between it and tiie lake Tonl6 Sap. As will be 
seen from the small plan (Fig. 2, Woodcut No. 459) it is almost 
an ejcact square, and measures nearly an English mile each way.* 
The walled enclosure of the temple measures 1080 yds. by 
1 100, and is surrounded by a moat 216 yds. wide. Tm moat 
is crossed on the west by a splendid causeway, carried on piers 
on either side. This leads to the great gateway five storeys in 

^ These are analogous to the small France obtained from Siam the movinces 
shrines connected with Hindd temples, as of Battambang, Slemreap and Sisopbon. 
at Kailds, ElM, at Sinnar, Dhamnar, etc. These include the tem|de of Angkor Vftt, 

* L. deLajonqui^e, *Inventaire arch^* and numerous other examples that bear 
olcgique/'tome i. pp. 16*99. witness to the splendour of the ancient 

3 Lac. cit. tome U pp. Cambodian civiUsation, 

^ By the treaty of 33rd March 1907, 








FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 





height, not unlike the 
gopura of a Dravidian 
temple, but extended 
by lateral galleries and 
towers to a facade more 
than 600 ft. in extent. 
Within this a second 
raised causeway, 370 
yds. long, leads to a 
cruciform platform in 
front of the temple 
.(shown in Fig. i, Woodr 
cut No. 459). On either 
side of this, about half- 
way down, is a detached 
temple, which anywhere 
else would be considered 
of importance, but here 
may be passed over. 

The general plan of 
the temple will be un- 
derstood from the wood- 
cut (No. 459). It con- 
sists of three enclosures, 
one within the other, 
each raised from 15. ft. 
to 20 ft. above the level 
of that outside it, so as 
to give the whole a 
pyramidal form. The 
outer enclosure measures 
590 ft. by 700 ft., and 
covers, therefore, about 
413,000 sq. ft. The 
great temple at Karnak 
(Thebes) covers 430,000 
sq. ft. There are three 
portals, adorned with 
towers on each face, and 
on either side of these 
are open galleries or 
verandahs, which, with 
their bas-reliefs, are pro- 
bably the most remark- 
able features of this 
temple. Their external 



Chap. II. TEMPL-E OF ANGKOR VAT. 383 

appearance will be understood from the Woodcut No. 463; 
that of the interior from Woodcut No. 463 ; diough these 
illustrations are on too small a scale to do justice to their 
munificence. 

Its appearance in elevation may be gathered from Woodcut 
No. 460, which shows it to be a pyramid more than 600 ft. in 
breadth across its shortest width north and south, and rising to 
180 ft. at the summit of the central tower. It is, consequently, 
both larger and higher than Boro-Budur, and notwithstanding 
the extraordinary elaboration of that temple it is probably sur- 
passed by this one, both in the extent of its ornamentation as 
well as in the delicacy of its carvings. There may have been 
as much, or nearly as much, labour bestowed on the colonnades 
at R3m&rvaram as on this temple; but otherwise the Indian 
example cannot compare with either of these two. It has liter- 
ally no outline and practically no design ; while both Angkor 
V^t and Boro-Budur are as remarkable for their architectural 
designs as for their sculptural decorations. 

The mechanical arrangements of the galleries or colonnades 
above referred to are as perfect as their artistic design. These 
will be understood from the diagram. Woodcut No. 461. On 
one side is a solid wall of the most exquisite masonry, support- 
ing the inner terrace of the temple. It is built of large stones 
without cement, and so beautifully fitted that it is difficult to 
detect the joints between two stones. In front of this are two 
rows of square piers, with capitals also similar to the classi- 
cal examples, but more ornamented. 

These piers have no bases, but on 
each face is carved a figure of a 
devotee or worshipper, surmounted by 
a canopy of incised ornament, which 
is also carried along the edge of the, 
shafts. The piers carry an architrave 
and a deep frieze, which, in the inner 
part of the temple, is ornamented with 
bas-reliefs of the most elaborate char- 
acter, and above this is a cornice of 
very classical outline. Above the cor- 
nices is a pointed arch, not formed with 
voussoirs, but of stones projecting one 
beyond the other, as with the old 

Pelasgi and with the Hindfls to the Diagram Sectita of 

present day. This is quite plain, and corridor, Angkor VAt. 
was probably originally intended to be 

hidden by a wooden ceiling, as indicated in the diagram ; at 
least Mr. Thomson discovered the mortises which were 




FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


3*4 

intoided to secure some such adornment, and in one place the 
remains of a teakwood ceiling beautifully and elaborately 
carved. 

Outside this gallery, as shown in the Woodcuts Nos. 461, 
462, is a second, supported by shorter piers, with both base 
and capital. This outer range supports what may be called 
a transverse tie-beam, one end of which is tenoned into the 



View of Exterior of Angkor VAt. (From a Photograph by Mr. J. Thomson.) 


inner piers just below the capital. So beautifully, however, 
is this fitted, that M. Mouhot asserts the inner piers are 
nionoliths, and, like the other joints of the masonry, the junction 
cannot ht detected even in the photograph unless pointed out. 
The b^uty of this arrangement will at once strike any one who 
knows how difficult it is to keep the sun out and let in the light 
and air, so indispensable in that climate. The British have tried 


Crap. II. 


TEMPLE OF ANGKOR VAT. 


5«S 

to effect it in India for lOO years, but never hit on anjrthing 
either so artistic or convenient as this. 'It is, in fact, the 
solution of a problem over which we might have puzzled for 
centuries, but which the Cambodians resolved instinctively. 
The exterior cornice here, as throughout the temple, is composed 
of infinite repetitions of the seven*headed snake. 



463. of Interior of Corridor, Angkor VAt. (From a Photograph by Mr. J. Thomson.) 

The most wonderful parts, however, of these -colonnades of 
Angkor V 4 t are the sculptures that adorn their walls. These 
are distributed in eight compartments, one on each side of the 
four central groups of entrances, measuring each from 250 ft. 
to 300 ft. in length, with a height of about ft. Their aggre- 
gate length is thus at least 2000 ft., and assuming the parts 
photographed to be a fair average, the number of men and 



FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


386 

animals represented extends from 18,000 to 20,00a The relief 
is so low that in the photograph it looks at first sight as if incised 
— inUtgliato — like the Egyptian sculptures ; but this is not the 
case. Generally speaking, these reliefs represent battle-scenes 
of the most animated description, taken from the Rim&yana 
or Mahibhirata, which the immigrants either brought with 
them, or, as the Siamese annals say, received from India in the 
4th or 5th century ; these, Pathammasurivong, the founder of 
the city, caused to be translated into Cambodian, with con- 
siderable variations, and here they are sculptured almost in 
extenso} 

One bas-relief, however, is occupied by a different subject — 
popularly supposed to represent heaven, earth, and hell. Above 
is a procession so closely resembling those in Egyptian temples 
as to be startling. The king is borne in a palanquin very like 
those seen in the sculptures on the banks of the Nile, and 
accompanied by standards and emblems which go far to complete 
the illusion. In the middle row sits a judge, with a numerous 
body of assessors, and the condemned are thrown down to a 
lower region, where they are represented as tortured in ail the 
modes which Eastern ingenuity has devised. One subject alone 
can be called mythological, and it wears an old familiar face ; 
it represents the second Avat&r of Vishnu, the world-supporting 
tortoise, and the churning of the ocean with the great snake 
NAga. No legend in Hindu mythology could be more 
appropriate for a snake-temple; but, notwithstanding this, it 
is out of place, and I cannot help fancying that it was his 
choice of this subject that gave rise to the tradition that the 
king was afflicted with leprosy because he had deserted the 
faith of his forefathers. This relief is evidently the last 
attempted, and still remains unfinished. 

The only other temples that I am aware of where sculpture 
is used in anything like the same prufusiun are those at Boro- 
Budur in’ JAva and that at Halebid, described above (vol. i. 
p. 446). In the Indian example, however, the principles on 
which it is employed are diametrically opposed to those in 
vogue in Cambodia. There all the sculptures are in high relief, 
many of the figures standing free, and all are essential parts 
of the architecture — are, in fact, the architecture itself. Here, 
however, the two arts are kept quite distinct and independent, 
each mtitually aiding the other, but each perfect by itself, and 
separate in its aim. The Gothic architects attempted to 
incorporate their sculpture with the architecture in the same 
manner as the Indian architects. The Greeks, on the contrary. 


Bastian, loc. ck, %*ol. i. p. 402. 




it by screens of columns precisely as the Cambodians did ; and it 
is difficult to say which was the best principle. A critic imbued 
with the feelings of medijuval art would side with the Indians ; 



388 FURTHER INDIA. Book VIIl. 

but if the Greeks were correct in their principle, so certainly 
were the Cambodians. 

Leaving these outer peristyles for the present, and entering 
oy the west door, we found ourselves in an ante-naos measuring 
i8o ft. by 150 ft., supported by more than 100 piers, and 
lighted by four small courts open to the sky above. The whole 

of this part is arranged most artistically, 
so as to obtain the most varied and 
picturesque effects, and is as well 
worthy of study as any part of the 
temple. Beyond this, on either hand, 
is a detached temple, similar in plan 
to those that stand on either side of 
the causeway (Fig. 2, Woodcut No. 459), 
half-way between the entrance and the 
temple. 

Ascending from this we enter the 
middle court, in the centre of which 
stands what may be considered as the 
temple itself. It measures 200 ft. by 
213 ft, and is crowned by five towers 
or spires, one on each angle, and one, 
taller than the others, in the centre, 
rising to a height of 180 ft The central 
tower has four cells, one facing the 
central hall from each side. The general 
appearance of these towers may 'be 
gathered from ' the elevation (Woodcut 
No. 460), and from Woodcut No. 464. 
They are very Indian in character and 
outline, but, when looked closely into, 
are unlike anything known in that 
country. The building which resem- 
bles the inner temple most, so far as 
at present known, is that at R&npur 
(Woodcut No. 288). Its dimensions 
465. Pier of Porch, Angkor VM. are nearly the same, 200 ft. by 225 ft.; 

(From a by Mr. ] jj jjj^g flyg spires similarly dis- 

posed, and four open courts; and at 
Ranpur, as here, there are a certain number of snake-figures, 
which might suggest a connection between the two. But there 
the similarity ceases. The extraordinary amount of richness and 
exuberance of detail in the Cambodian temple far surpasses that 
of the Indian example ; and the courts at Angkor V8t are not 
courts but water-tanks. How far the lower courts were also 
capable of being flooded is not clear, nor whether the whole 




Chap. II. 


TEMPLE OF ANGKOR VAT. 


area, iloo yda square, in 
which the temple stands, 
was not also capable of 
being turned into a lake.' 
If it were, it is difficult to 
conceive a more fairy-like 
scene than this temple would 
have presented, rising from 
the lake which reflected its 
forms in the calm stillness 
of a tropical sunset. 

One of the most curious 
circumstances connected 
with the architecture of this 
temple is, that all the piers 
are as essentially of the 
Roman Doric order, as those 
of Kashmir are of the 
Grecian Doric. Even if 
this is disputed, one thing 
at least is certain, that no 
such piers occur . anywhere 
in India. At Angkor V&t 
there is not a single bracket- 
capital nor an Indian base,^ 
and although there are in- 
tersecting vaults and in- 
genious roofing contrivances 
of all sorts, there is no 
dome, and no hint that the 
architects were aware of the 
existence of such a form. 
On the contrary, take such 
a pier as that shown in 
Woodcut No. 465 : the pro- 
portion of diameter to 
height ; the proportion be- 
tween the upper and lower 

^ Mr. Thomson was informed that 
during the rains the whole was 
flooded, in which case the temple 
could only be reached in boats. 

* Outside the temple the sides of 
the causeways are in places supported 
on dwarf columns of circular form. 
They seem to simulate a bundle of 
eight reeds, and have tall capitals. 



390 


FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


diameter ; the capital with its abacus ; the base with its plhith ; 
the architrave, etc, are so like the Roman order that it is 
difficult to conceive the likeness being accidental. 

dut whoever gave the design for these piers — and, according 
to M. Mouhot, there are 1532 of them in this single building 
— we have abundant evidence to show that the people for whom 
it was erected were of Turanian blood. Without insisting on 
other facts, there are in every part of the building groups of 
female figures in alto-rilievo. They are sometimes in niches or 
in pairs, as in the Woodcut No. 466, attached to pilasters, or 
in groups of four or more. There are a hundred or more in 
various parts of the building, and all have the thick lips and 
the flat noses of true Tartars, their eyes forming an angle with 
one another like those of the Egyptians, or any other of the 
true building*races of the world. Unfortunately, no statues of 
men are so attached, though there are several free-standing 
figures which tell the same tale. The bas-reliefs do not help 
in the enquiry, as the artist has taken pains to distinguish 
carefully the ethnographic peculiarities of all the nations repre- 
sented, and, till the inscriptions are read, and we know who are 
intended for Iitdians or who for Chinese or Cambodians, we 
cannot use the evidence they supply. 

It is a well-known fact that, wherever Serpent - worship 
prevailed in any part of the world, it was the custom to devote 
the most beautiful .young girls to the service of the temple, and 
this may account for the numerous female statues. Though 
the god is gone, and the Buddhists have taken possession of the 
temple, every angle of every roof is adorned with an image of 
the seven-headed snake, and there are hundreds of them ; every 
comice is composed of snakes’ hea,ds ; every convolution of the 
roofs, and there are thousands, terminates in a five or seven- 
headed snake. The balustrades are snakes, and the ridge of 
every roof was apparently adorned with gilt dragons. These 
being in metal, have disappeared, but the holes into which th^ 
were fixed can still be seen on every ridge. 

This temple, now in French hands, has been taken possession 
of by Siamese bonzes, who have dedicated it to the worship 
of Buddha. Th^ have introduced images of him into the 
sanctuaries and other 'places, and, with the usual incuriousness 
of people of their class,, assert that it was always so. If, however, 
there is one thing more certain than another in this history, it is 
that Angkor Vflt vras not originally erected by Buddhists or for 
Bhddhist porpescK bi the. first place, there is no sign of a 
dflgaba xmt of a vih&ra, or of a chaitya halt in the whde building, 
n&r an)rthii^ that can be called a reminiscence of any feature 
of Buddhist architecture. More than this, there is no trace 



Chat. II. 


TEMPLE OF ANGKOR VAT. 


391 


of Buddha, of any scene from his life, or from, the j&takas to 
be found among the sculptures. In former days it thight be 
excusable to doubt this ; but it is not so now that any man may 
make himself familiar with the sculptures at Bharaut, at Siinchi, 
or Amar&vatt, or with those from the Gand^ra monasteries 
or at Boro-Budur. It is just as easy to recc^ise a Buddhist 
scene or legend in these representations, as it is to identify a 
Christian scene in the Arena chapel at Padua, or at Monreale 
near Palermo. What may hereafter turn up I do not know, 
but meanwhile I most unhesitatingly assert that there is not 
a trace of Buddhism in any of the bas-reliefs yet brought to 
l^ht from Angkor Vfit, nor an integral statue of Buddha or of 
any Buddhist saint about the place. 

I am, of course, aware that there are traditions of Ajoka 
having sent missionaries there, and of Buddhi^hosha having 
visited the place, ^ but they are the merest of traditions, imported 
apparently from Siam, and restii^ on no authenticated basis. 
Had Buddhists ever co(ne here en masse, or the country ever 
been converted to that religion, it seems impossible the fact 
should not be observable in the buildings. But there seems 
no trace of it there< There is no Eastern country, in fact, 
where that religion seems to have been so little known in 
ancient times. The testimony of the Chinese traveller, who 
visited the country in A.D. 1295,' is sufRcient to prove it did 
exist in his time; but, like his predecessors Fah Hian and 
Hiuen Tsiang, he saw his own faith everywhere, and, with 
true Chinese superciliousness, saw no other religion anywhere. 

So far as can be at present ascertained, it seems as if the 
ihigrations of the Indians to Java and to Cambodia took place 
about the same time and from the same quarter; but with 
this remarkable difference: they went en masse to Jiva, and 
found a tabula rasa — a people, it may be, numerous, but with- 
out arts or religion, and they implanted there their own with 
very slight mr^ifications. In Cambodia the country must 
have been more civilised, and had a religion, if not an art. 
The Indians seem slowly, and only to a limited extent; to 
have been able to modify their rdigion towards Hinduism, 
probably because it was identical, or at least sympathetic; 
but they certainly endowed the Cambodians with an art which 
we have no reason to suppose they before possessed. Now 
that we kn<m to what an extent classical art prevailed in 

1 Gunier, loc. eit. ' 'kA. L p. lao. Mtlonget Asktiqaei,*hefiiid*tbeearlieit 
Butian, voL L pp; 415, 438, etc. mention of the Cambodian kingdom in 

* In the eztracU from die ‘Chineie a.d. 616. From that (leriod the acoounta 
Anna's,* traiwUijA tqr Abel Remniat, in are tolerably consecutive to A.i>. 1395, 
the fiist volnme at the ' Nonveaux bat before that nothing. 



39 * 


FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


the countiy these Indians are reputed to have come from, 
.and to how late a date that art continued to be practised 
in the north-west, we are no longer puzzled to understand 
the prevalence of classical details in this temple; but to work 
out the connection in all its variations is one of the most 
interesting problems that remain to exercise the ingenuity of 
future explorers. 

Bayon. 

■The great temple of Bayon, within the city walls of Angkor 
Thom, is supposed to have been founded by the first king of the 
dynasty, Jayavarman II., and consecrated by Yarovarman about 
900 A.D. This temple belongs to the third class, where, in con- 
sequence of the height of the two great platforms on which it is 
built and of the central sanctuary, a pyramidal contour is given to 
the structure. It is regarded as the chef ^ceuvre of Cambodian 
architecture, not only on account of the splendour and vigour 
of its sculptured decorations, but for the magnificence of its 
plan (Woodcut No. 467). The principal difference between it 
and Angkor VAt is found in the second platform, and the 
great importance given to the sanctuary. Instead of having 
a third enclosure, the four angles of the second enclosure are 
filled with smaller courts, so as to leave sufficient space for 
the great entrance porches on the north, south and west sides, 
and for the entrance porch vestibule and two other halls pre- 
ceding the sanctuary on the east side. Supplementary porches 
and halls are placed on the diagonal lines, with a double peri- 
style enclosing the whole, which must have formed a group of 
exceptional magnificence. 

In consequence of the terrible ruin which pervades the 
whole structure, owing to the forest of trees which has invaded 
it, there is no general view of it to be obtained, and its appear- 
ance can only be gathered by imagining the effect of Angkor 
VAt with f\fty tovrars instead of nine, the whole more richly and 
elaWately ornamented than even that temple; to this must be 
added the increase of the pyramidal composition, owing to the 
closer grouping of all the towers and their decoration with the 
four great masks of BrahmA on each face, masks which, in their 
fine modelling and expression, are only approached by the great 
Egyptian Sphinx. Woodcut No. 468, representing one of the 
inner towers about 50 ft. high, gives some idea of the still 
greater examples — that over the sanctuaiy being calculated as 
150 ft. high. Half way up the tower were e^ht projecting 
frontispieces, each carved with the head of BrahmA and giving 
greater importance to the sanctuary tower. 

Bayon is the only temple, according to Delaporte, which has 



Chap. II. 


TEMPLE OF BAYON. 
W . 


393 





FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


394 

a double enclosure of sculptured corridors, the aggregate length 



468. One of the Towers of the Temple of E^on in Angkor Thom. 
(From a Photograph by Mr. J. Thomson.) 


of which, has been calculated to be over 36,000 ft, or nearly 
twice that of Angkor V 4 t 


Beng M£aleA. 

The third great example is that of the temple of Beng 
M6ale& (Woodcut No. 4^), a^ut 20 miles east of Angkor 
Thom. This temple belongs to the first class, all the enclosures 
being more or less on the same level. No inscriptions of any 
kind have been found on the structure, but according to 
Aymonier, who judges by the general design and decoration, 
it probably belongs to the 9th century. There is an excep- 
tional feature in it ; in the first enclosure on the south or left 
hand side are two groups of buildings which nre assumed to 


Chap. II. 


TEMPLE OF BENG MEALEA. 


395 


have been the palaces of the King and Queen respectively. 
The lower or eastern one (P), of which the great central htdl, with 



E 


SttmU vTFmU 

469. Plan of the Temple at Beng MdaleA. 

a portion of its vault, still exists in situ, is supposed to have been 
the Queen’s Palace, this hall being lighted from -four courts ; 
the absence of any smaller apartments in this and the western 
block (V) render its appropriation doubtful, but the great hall 
with its side aisles would seem to have been built as a throne 
or state reception room. All the outer courts were filled with 




FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


396 

water, forming huge tanks (srau), but they are too small to have 
served for nautical displays. The conjectural restoration, as 
shown in the bird’s-eye view of Beng Mialei in Woodcut No. 
470^ gives a very good impression of the architectural composi- 



470. Cdo|eetiiril Restoration of the Temple of Btog M^eA. Bj M. L. Ddaporte. 
(From ** Lt Cambodge “ : tome 1 . *' le Roysume Actuel " par Etienne Aymonier.) 


tion of the Cambodian temples, which, with their smaller 
corridma and great halls, seem to be more appropriate as 
palaces. All the corridors and halls were vaultra in stone, a 
type of construction which was employed only in religious 
structures. The walls of the corridors here were not carved 
as those of Angkor Vit and Bayon, the decoration being con- 
fined to the entrance portals and the towers. One of the 
crudfortn terraces carrira on circular piers, to which reference 
has been made. Is shown in this view, vdthout, however, the 
serpent balustrades or flights of steps down to the lower level, 
as found at Angkor V&t 

Other Temples. 

Oh the east side of Angkor Thom> distant respectively 
half a' mile smd a mile fiom the same, , are two tem{des, Ta 
Ptohm uul Bfintftai Kedd, which are richly decorated with 




Chaf. It. 


OTHER TEMPLES. 


397 


fine sculpture. The two inner enclosures are surrounded with 
corridors, of which the outer one consists of a central and 
side aisle, as at Ai^^kor V&t, the wall being on the inner 
side. On the gopuras of the four enclosures, tite angles of 
the larger inner enclosure, the sanctuary, and other structures, 
there are said to have been as many as twenty-eight towers, 
nine of which were carved with the four faces of B^mS. The 
temple of B&ntiai Kedei is said to have been originally dedi- 
cated to Buddha, but as the faces of Brahmi decorate the 
towers of the east and west gopuras, this is doubtful. The plan 
of the two structures in the inner enclosure differs from- any 
other examples, the latger one — ^which from its position should 
be the sanctuary, consists, according to Aymonier,* of a series 
of fow corridors, running north and south and east and west, 
crossing one another and carrying corbelled domes at their 
intersection. 

In the temple of Phnom Chisor (Prov. Bftti) the corridor of 
the single enclosure is subdivided by a number of cross walls 
forming separate compartments, four of which have entrance 
doors, a flight of steps leading to the park outside, and to the 
internal court. All the rooms are lighted by baluster windows, 
those on the east or entrance side looking outwards, the others 
on to the court The' same disposition of windowrs is found in 
the temple of Prah-khan (Prov. Kompong Svay), but here the 
corridor is not subdivided by cross walls. Parts of that temple, 
of which two illustrations are given, are well preserved (Plate 
XLV.), showing the baluster windows and the universal door- 
way, which is found in all the temples, varying only in the 
sculptured decoration of the architrave and &e tympanum of 
the gable. The octagonal shafts which flank the entrance 
doors of all the Caml^ian temples are gone in this instance 
at Prah-khan, but Woodcut No. 471, at Bassak, may be taken 
as a typical example of the usual doorway. 

The courses of masonry of the temples are always horizontal, 
and those above the doorway are carried far back into the wall, 
so that' the octagonal shafts on each side are only decorative 
features. The architecture above the door is always richly 
carved with varying designs, the gable being enshrined with 
two serpents with N&ga head terminations, which respond to 
the antefixae of Greek temples ; outside the serpents* bcmies are 
flames which take the place of crockets, and the tympana are 
carved with figures. The same illustration (Plate ^LV.) shows 
the rectangular windows with balustrades, the panel decoration 
between them with female figures representing the Thevadas or 


^ Op. cit. tome iii. pp. 19-21. 



FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 



as shown in Plate XLV., of the terrible ruin which is overtaking 
ail the Cambodian temples owing to the overgrowth of the 
trees. The preservation of this building, constructed nearly 
nine centuries ago, is very remarkable, and this is borne out 
better in Plate XLIV., where, owing to the magnificent con- 
struction, the tower still stands erect, having lost only its two 
upper storeys and lotus cresting. 

Pyramid Temples. 

The finest example of the pyramid temples is that of 
Bapuon, immediately south of tm pal&ce in Angkor Thom. 
It bears considerable resemblance to the temple of Bayon, but 
the height of the second and third platforms is much greater 
than in the latter; thus whilst the first and second platforms 
of Bayon are respectively to and 26 ft. in height, those of 
Bapuon are 21 and 37, and the third platform is ^ ft. high. 
The Brahmfl masks were not carved on the twenty-emht towers 
of Bapuon, nor are the walls of the corridor enriched with the 
bas-relief sculpture of Bayon and Angkor V&t The richness 
in beauty of the cau'ving, however, is quite as fine as that of 
Bayon, and the arabesque scrolls of the architrave at Bassak 
(WobdcFt No. 471), and of the pilasters-and vertical mnels 
elsewhere bear much resemblance to iith century work French 
Gothic. The Chinese traveller of the 13th century already 



Crap. II. 


PALACES. 


399 


referred to/ after mentioning the central tower of Bayon, refers 
to a second example surmounted by a tower of gold' copper, 
much higher than that first named, and adds : “ in the palace 
enclosure is another golden tower, which can only be wt of 
FhimSanakas, the pyramid temple,” in the centre of the palace 
enclosure in Angkor Thom. The lower platform of this temple 
measures 131 ft by 8a ft, and is 8 ft high, the second is 23 ft. 
high, and the third 20 ft. ; the upper platform is surrounded 
by a vaulted corridor barely 4 ft wide inside, with rectai^lar 
windows on each side; only the lofty substructure of the 
sanctuary remains, which it is thought may have carried a 
loffy tower in wood covered with copper and gilded. 

Of simpler types of the pyramidal temple, the example on 
the hill of Bakheng, south of Angkor Thom, is interesting, 
owing to the small towers, thirty-six in number, built within 
the first enclosure and outside the central pyramid ; constructed 
originally to locate a statue, such as remain are utilised now 
as columbaria in which the ashes of parents are deposited. 
The pyramid consists of five platforms, on each of which are 
small circular turrets about 15ft. high ; on the upper platform 
was a cruciform sanctuary of importance, but now in such 
a state of ruin that its plan cannot be well determined. In 
the temple of Ta Kto, east of Angkor Thom, there are two 
enclosures, the inner one with corridor and tower on each side of 
the entrance gopura, and in the centre a pyramid of three stores 
with a lofty sanctuary and four other towers. The symmetrical 
arrangement of the towers in this temple and in thpse at 
Bakheng and the similarity of design show that all date from 
the same period, and that they were probably built as memorial 
structures. 

Palaces. 

Whether any of the immense structures already described 
were ever occupied as residences by the Cambodian monarchs 
is not known, but the latest writer on the subject. General de 
Beyli^, assumes, and he is followed to a certain extent some 
other French authorities, that some of the temples were built 
as palaces for the King and occupied by hint, his family, and 
courtiers, though in a Brahmanic state this is hardly probable.* 
It should be pointed out, however, that in the outer court of Beng 
M^alei aretwo groups of structures which have been described as 

‘ P«ge 373. numerous students and pnndiu, and were 

* It should be borne in mind that in liberally supported 1 ^ royal bountha. 
earlier thnes the monasteries or Mathas These great structures may in many cases 
of the Brthmans, being also colleges for have been such college Kadms.— 
swted studies, must nave been eaten- Conf. Lajonquiere'InventaiteDescriptif,* 
sive to provide accommodation for the tome ii. introd. p. ap. 



460 FURTHER INDIA. Book VIII. 

the palaces of the Kii^ and Queen respectively, whereas if the 
temple had been built tor a palace, thqr would be found in the 
central enclosure. On the west side of Phimfianakas, and witiiin 
the i^ace enclosure of Angkor Thom, are the foundations of 
buildings, which are suppose! to have been the residences of 
the King and his family ; the women’s quarters occui^ng the 
whole width of the enclosure against the west wall, in which there 
is no entrance gate. At V&t Phu, near Bassak, on either side 
of the causeway leading to the temple, is a structure of about 
150 ft. frontage with a rectangular court at the back and 
surrounded wim a corridor vaulted like those in the temples: 
and those are considered to be palaces, though they may have 
been occupied only by the Kings of Bassak, who were subject 
to the Cambodian monarch. Again at Phnom Chisor, to which 
reference has been made, on the north side of the court the 
sills of the windows are 6 ft. from the ground, so that the 
corridor they lighted may have been occupied by women. 
But in all these cases the accommodation would barely be 
sufficient for a hunting box, and for a monarch like the King 
of Cambodia, whose retinue consisted of hundreds if not 
thousands, the temples of Angkor V&t and Beng M6ale&, Ta 
Prohm and Prah>khan, are the only structures which could 
possibly hold the'm. As r^ard Bayon,. situated within the 
city of Angkor Thom and in proximity to the palace, that may 
have been occupied by the priests only, but in Angkor Vftt and 
Beng M^e& the senes of magnificent halls which figure in 
the enclosures would seem to have been provided for the needs 
of a great court ; this, however, is a subject which requires further 
investigation, on which it is hoped that other inscriptions found, 
when deciphered, may perhaps throw more light. The temple 
and the King’s palace were the only buildings in Cambodia 
where permanence was obtained by vaulting them over in stone. 
As this, according to the Cambodian system of construction, 
could only effected by horizontal courses of stone corbelled 
out, ftie mrnensions of the galleries and halls were extremely 
limited in their width, and increased accommodation could 
only be met by their extension in length — thus the outer 
corridor of Angkor V&t was 2400 ft. in length, the cross halls 
in front of the second enclosure and those of the latter measure 
1,800 ft., and the inner enclosure, including the passages leading 
to the sanctuary, about 900 ft. more, or altc^ther about 4,300 ft. 
of corridor, of which 3,300 ft., with the double aisles, was only 
about 18 ft. wide, and the remainder 10 ft. wide or less. Halls 
of greater width must have had roofs of timber covered with 
tile^ which have all disappeared long ago, and can never have 
had a long existence, as the termites or white ants in Cambodia 



Cka?. II. 


CIVIL ARCHITECTURE. 


401 


rendeted timber an ephemeral construction, teak being the only 
wood thQr are unable to destn^. One or two bas-reliefs give 
r e presentations of small structures in front of which are groups 
of figures supposed to represent the King and his fomily, and 
tiiese in design are identical with the gopuras which form the 
entrances to all the temples. 

Civil Architecture. 

The principal remains existing are those of the great 
enclosure walls and the gates of Angkor Thom the capital, 
founded by Jayavarman II., the first king, but not completed 
or occupiM till the reign of Yarovarman, the fourth king. 
Tlie city measured close upon 10,000 ft. from east to west, 
and 9,6w ft. from north to south, giving a perimeter of miles 
to the enclosure walls. Those walls, about 22 ft. high, were 
surrounded by a moat 300 ft. wide and entered through five 
gates, one on the north, south and west sides, and two on the 
east, the most important, called the Gite of Victory, leading 
to the palace. Its plan, like those of the gopuras to which 
reference has been made, was cruciform, consisting of a central 
gateway 52 ft. square, with recessed aneles and side wings. 
Three towers, the upper portions of which were sculptured on 
all four sides with me BrahmR mask in stone similar to those 
in Wo^cut Na 468, rose above the central gateway and the 
side wings. On each side of the gateway ana in the recessed 
angles elephants’ heads and trunks were carved, and above 
them numerous figures of NAgas and other subjects. This 
is probably the entrance gateway described the Chinese 
visitor in 1295, as he refers^ to the great heads in stone above 
the gateways which he thought to be mose of Buddha, to me 
figures of elephants on each side of the entrance gateway, and 
to the great bridge over me moat in front, on each side of 
which were fiffy-four statues in stone of great height carrying 
a serpent with nine heads. The trunk of the serpent’s body 
in this case formed the balustrade and at me entrance to me 
bridge were immense heads similar to those shown in 

Plate XLIV., Fig. 2. Portions of these figures still exist, as also 
traces of those in front of the omer gates. Similar parapets have 
qifn been found at B&ntiai Prah-khan, norm of Angkor Thom. 
The other eastern gate led to the temple of Bayon, already 
lefened to. The palace enclosure, situated nearly in the 
centre of the city, measured about zjooo ft. 800 ft, and wax 

' ^Deiqiption du Resume de Cam- timdoit du Chinois par M. Abel KtmvUx* 
bodee pu voyafew Chinois qui a 1817. 
cette contr^e i m fin du xiii* siMle»’ 



409 


FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


surrounded by a double wall, with moat between. The western 
portion of the enclosure was probably occupied by the King 
and his family, and with the exception of the pyramidal temole 
of Phim6anakas, a few towers and many stone banks, no archi- 
tectural remains have been found. In front of the palace 
enclosure was a great terrace over 800 ft. long by 45 ft wide, 
and 15 ft high, the walls of which were sculptured with 
elephants; no traces of walls of any description have been 
found in front of this terrace, suggesting that it formed an 
open space where reviews took place before the King and his 
courtiers on the terrace. At the north end of this square is a 
cruciform structure about 30 ft wide and 60 ft. long, richly 
decorated, with six bands of sculptured figures, and it was on 
the top of this that the French explorers found the supposed 
statue of the leprous king to whom the monument was ascribed. 

The walls of the cities were also of very great extent, and 
of dimensions commensurate with their importance. They seem 
generally to have been constructed of a coarse ferruginous 
stone in large blocks, and only the gates and ornamental parts 
were of the fine-grained sandstone of which the temples and 
palaces are built. Wonderful as these temples and palaces are, 
the circumstance that, perhaps, after all g^ves the highest idea 
of the civilisation of these ancient Cambodians is the perfec- 
tion of thiiit roads and bridges. One great trunk road seems 
to have stretched for 300 miles across the country from Korat, 
in a south-easterly direction, to the Me-kong river. It was a 
raised causeway, paved throughout like a Roman road, and every 
stream that it crossed was spanned by a bridge, many of which 
remain perfect to the present day. Dr. Bastian describes two 
of these: one, 400 ft. in length, and 50 ft in breadth, richly 
ornamented by balustrades and cornices, and representations 
of snakes and the Snake king.^ The extraordinary thing is, 
that it is constructed without radiating arches, but like every 
structure in the place, by a system of bracketing or horizontal 
arches, and without cement Yet it has withstood, for five 
centuries at least, the violence of the tropical torrent which it 
spans. 

Even if no vestiges of the^e roads or bridges remained, the 
sculptures of Angkor V&t are sufficient to prove the state of 
perfection which the art of transport had reached in this 
community. In these there are numerous representations of 
chariots, all with wheels from 3 ft. or 5 ft. in height, and with 
sixteen spokes, which must be’ of metal, for no London coach- 
maker at the present day could frame anything so delicate 


> ‘Journal of the Royal Geographical SocRty,' vol. xxxv. p. 75. 



Chap. II. 


CIVIL ARCHITECTURE. 


403 


in wood. The rims, too, are in metal, and, apparently, the 
wheel turns on the axle. Those who are aware how difficult a 
problem it is to make a perfect wheel will appreciate how much 
is involved in such a perfect solution of the problem as is here 
found. But it requires a knowledge of the clumsiness of the 
Romans and our mediaeval forefathers in this respect, and the 
utter barbarism of the wheels represented in Indian sculptures 
and still used in India, to feel fully its importance as an index 
of high civilisation. 

If, however, the Cambodians were the only people who 
before the 13th century made such wheels as these, it is also 
probably true that their architects were the only ones who had 
sufficient mechanical skill to construct their roofs wholly of 
hewn stone, without the aid either of wood or concrete, and who 
could dovetail and join them so beautifully that they remain 
watertight and perfect after five centuries of neglect in a 
tropical climate. Nothing can exceed the skill and ingenuity 
urith which the stones of the roofs are joggled and fitted into 
one another, unless it is the skill with which the joints of their 
plain walls are so polished and so evenly laid without cement 
of any kind. It is difficult to detect their joints even in a sun- 
picture, which generally reveals flaws not to be detected by 
the eye. Except in the works of the old pyramid-building 
Egyptians, I know of nothing to compare with it 

When we put all these things together, it is difficult to 
decide whether we ought most to admire the mechanical skill 
which the Cambodian architects displayed in construction or 
the largeness of conception and artistic merit which pervades 
every part of their designs. These alone ought to be more 
than sufficient to recommend their study to every architect. 
To the historian of art the wonder is to find temples with 
such a singular combination of styles in such a locality — Indian 
temples constructed with pillars almost purely classical in 
design, and ornamented with bas-mliefs so strangely Egyptian 
in character. To the ethnologist they are almost dually 
interesting, in consequence of the religion to which they are 
dedicated. Taken together, their circumstances render their 
complete investigation of the utmost importance. 



CHAPTER III. 
SIAM. 


CONTENTS. 

StructuK* in the temple enclosures — Temples at Sukhoda^ Phra Fathom, 

Sajjanilaya, Ayuthii, Lophaburi, Sangkalok and Bangicok — Hall of 
Audience at Bangkok. 

Although the architecture of Siam is much less important 
than that of Burma on the one hand, or Cambodia on the 
o^er, it is still sufficiently so to prevent its being passed over 
in a general summary of styles. Its worst feature, as we now 
know it, is, that it is so extremely modern. In the loth century 
the Thai, a' people from Sayam-dera on the north, b^an to 
press southwards against the earlier Brahmanical state of 
Cambodia, and foundra a new kingdom. Up to the 14th century 
the capital of this country was Sukbothal, or Sukhodaya, ar city^ 
on the Me>nam, 250 miles from the sea in a direct line, and 
situated close to' the hills.' About the year 1350 the Thai, 
now known as Siamese, were successful in their wars with 
the Cambodians, and eventually succeeded in capturing their 
capital, DwUravatt, which, under -the name of AyuthiA, b^me 
the capital of thb new empire, and practically they annexed all 
the western provinces of Cambodia to their dominion. Th^ 
brought in Buddhism, which proved fatal to the Brahmanical 
civilisation, and architecture with the other arts d^nerated. 

Havii^ accomplished tlw, they moved their capital down 
to AyuthiA, a little more than 50 miles from the sea; and 
three centuries afterwards Bai^'kok succeeded it, and is now 

> Tbit city was visited 1 ^ the late volume appeared after the author’s 
M. Lncieii Foumereau, who was sent death in 1906, and eontains plans of the 
by the French Government in 1891 on older temples at Sangkalok, Fhitaannlok, 
an arcbsBologi^ mission to Siam. The l^phaburiandAyuth»,batQnlbrtiinately 
lesoltt of hu researches are published in without descriptions.---* Le Siam Aodeii: 
two quarto volumes with admirably drawn Arch6ologie-^pigiiu^e — G^pgraphie ’ 
plans of numerous temple^ and photo- (’Annalesdu Musee uuimet,’ tomexuviL 
gravures of their remains. The second part i, .and szxi. part ay, 1905 and 1908. 



Crap. III. 


SIAM. 


405 


the capital. It is no means c^ain whether tins migpra* 
tion downwards was caused by political events and inerting 
commerce, or from! the coun^ gradually becoming drier and 
more fit for human habitation. Judging from what happened 
in Bengal in historical times, I should fancy it was the latter. 

In India we find civilised nations first established in the 


Panj&band on the watershed between the Satlaj and the Jamni. 
Between 2000 and 3000 years B.C Oudh seems to have become 
dry enough for human habitation, and Ayodhyi (from which 
the Siamese capital took its name) became the chief city. 


Between 1000 and 500 
B.C. Jinakpur on the 
north, and R&jagriha on 
the south, were the 
capital cities of Bengal ; 
but both being situated 
on the hills, it was not 
till Aroka’s time (250 
B.C) that Patna on the 
S6n and Vauilt on the 
Ganges, became capi- 
tals; and still another 
1000 years elapsed 
before Gaur and Dacca 
became important, while 
Murshidib&d, Huglt, 
and Calcutta, are cities 
of yesterday.^ The 
same phenomenon 
seems to have occurred 
in Siam, and, what is of 
still more interest, as we 
shall presently see, in 
Cambodia. 



As Ayuthii was for 
three centuries the 
fiourishing capital of 

one of the great building Ruins of a Pagoda at AyutbiA. 

races of the world, we 

should, of course, look for considerable magnificence having 
been displayed in its architecture. From the accounts of the 
early Portuguese and Dutch travellers who visited it in the 


* For the pardcnlars of this desiccation of the Valley of the Ganges, see the 
'Journal of the Geological Society,’ April, 1863. 


4o6 


FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


days of ito gloty, it seems to have merited the title thqr 
bestowed upon it of the “ Venice of the East," and the repiains 
justify their eulogiums. Some of the buildings, however, seem 
to have been constructed of brick and wood; and as the city 
hu now been practically deserted for more than a century, the 
wild fig-trees have eveiywhere inserted their roots into the 
masonry, and decay has progressed rapidly among the wood^ 
erections. As described by recent visitors, nothing can be more 
wildfy picturesque than this once splendid city, now overgrown 
with jungle ; .but such a stage of decay is, of all conditions, 
the least favourable to the researches of the antiquary. Four- 
nereau, however, was able not only to measure and work out 
the plans of some twenty temples, which are illustrated in his 
work already referred to, but to classify and describe the various 
constructions found in the enclosures of the temple, giving 
them the local names, and thus throwing an entirely new light 
on Siamese architecture. 

Vit is the name given to the outer enclosure of a temple, 
which was always rectangular, and generally of greater length 



473. Tntns^'erse wction of the Bot of VSt /•!, Sukhodaya. 


than width. The enclosure walls were as a rule about 3 ft. thick, 
and from 12 to 14 ft high. The most important building in the 
V&t was the Bot — the sacred temple — and usually the first built. 
This would seem to correspond with the Burmese Thein^ or 
ordination hall for priests,^ but in Siam it was always included 
in the temple enclosures, vdiere it stood opposite the principal 


* Saukrit, Uposathi-gAr«t or Vfofthdna-tdla. — Ant€, vol. i. pp. S13, 342. 



Chap. III. 


SIAM. 


407 


entrance. In Burma it seems sometimes to have been built in 
a separate enclosure of its own. The Bot was rectangular on 
plan, and was divided into central and side aisles by columns 
in stone, carrying open timber roofs covered urith glazed tiles 
in bright colours.' The illustration of the Bot of the VSt Ja'i 
at Sukhodaya (Woodcut No. 473) shows that in section it 
rambled that of an early Christian church with nave and side 
aisles. The roofs over the side aisles were at a lower level than 
that of the central aisle, leaving space for a clerestory, which 
consisted of pierced terra-cotta slabs. Similar perforated screens 
were built in between the outer columns of the aisles. In 
important temples the Bot had double aisles on each side. The 
system of tenoning beams into the columns is similar to that 
which is found in Chinese temples and halls, but here in Siam 
the columns are sometimes crowned with capitals carved with 
lotus leaves, the main beams and plates resting on the top of the 
capitals, the transverse beams across the aisles, and the beams 
carrying the clerestory being tenoned into the columns. 

The principal feature in the Bot, admission to which was 
confined to the priests, was the great altar carrying a gilded 
statue of Buddha, which was always placed in the central 
aisle, in the last bay but one. The Bot, which was always 
preceded by a porch, as a rule stood opposite the east entrance 
of the enclosure. 

In its rear was the principal Phra, or stilpa, of the temple, 
of which there were two types of design (Plate XLVl.), the 
Phra-Prang and the Phra-Chedi. The former is of a type 
peculiar to Siam; about half-way up is the cell, with its entrance 
door on the eastern side, access to which was obtained by a 
steep flight of steps, and recessed niches on the three other 
sides ; the form which it takes diflers in many essential respects 
from those we find either in India or Burma. The top, or upper 
part (Woodcut No. 472), has a domical shape, which we can 
easily fancy to be derived from the stflpa, but the upright part 
looks more like the 5 ikhara of a Hindfl temple than anything 
Buddhist 

The Phra-Chedi is based apparently on the stfipas of India, 
the cell containing the relics of Buddha, however, being placed 
undei^round, and reached in the larger examples by secret 
passages in the thickness of the walls. There is also some- 
times one characteristic Siamese feature not found in India 
or Cambodia, in the lower storey of the annulet spire, round 
which a series of detached columns or piers are built, giving 
the aspect of a classic peristyle ; this exists in one of the Phra- 
Chedis of Vat Jal, at Sukhodaya, and in the great example at 
Phra Pathom. The enormous structure now existing of the 



408 


FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


Fathom Chedi is the second enclosure or envelope of the 
original Chedi, and rises to the height of 344 ft It is sur- 
rounded a triple gallery with numerous pavilions, the roofs 
of which vrere in the last rebuilding of 1862 copied from those 
of Angkor V&t in Cambodia. 

Among other buildings cited by Foumereau are the Vihftns 
(Vihftras) and Kamburiens, similar in design to the Bot, but 
of smaller dimensions, where, the people assembled to offer 
up prayers and listen to sermons. 

Of the exceptional buildings found only in the Royal temples 
are the Chattamukk ^ and the Mondob (Mandapa) or Mora-dob. 
The former, cruciform in plan, was originally built to shelter a 
statue of the four-faced Brahmi ; this has been destro3red,and its 
place taken by four niches, placed back to back, each with a 
statue of Buddha facing the cardinal points. The finest example 
is found in the Vit Mondob SI N 4 at Sajjan&laya, where the plan 
is that of a Greek cross, nearly 100 ft. in its extreme dimensions, 
with central and side aisles to each arm. The Mondob is usually 
a rectangular building, containing a statue of Buddha. In the 
V&t Si Jum at Sukhodaya, it measured 57 ft. wide by 70 ft. 
deep, and sheltered an immense statue of Buddha, nearly 50 ft. 
high, which was constructed in brick, coated with stucco and 
gilded. The walls of the Mondob were also built in brick, and 
they carried a lofty roof or tower of the same material ; at a 
height of 32 ft. from the ground the brick courses commenced 
to project one in front of the other, till they met at the top, thus 
forming irr section an inverted pyramid. Both externally and 
intemuly, the brick walls and roof were coated with stucco. 
The roof has now fallen in, but the structure when built was 
probably over 100 ft high. Smaller Mondobs or pavilions were 
built to hold the Buddhap&da, the mythical representation of 
' the sacred foot of Buddha.* Two other buildings are quoted 
by Foumereau, the Ho’ Rakhang, or belfry, and the Ho’ Trai, 
or sacred libraiy, the latter found only in the Royal temples. 
The sacred tank in the enclosures was known as the Sa, 
equivalent to the Cambodian Sra. 

Of some of these structures many examples would be found 
in the same enclosure, thus in the Vit Jai at Sukhodaya, the 
most important temple illustrated by Foumereau, there was 
one great Phra-Chedi and its annexes, two Bots, six Vihflns, 
three Kamburiens, one ^londob, ten small pavilions, five Phra- 
Prang, and over a hundred Phra-Chedi, most of ^ese being 

* Suukiit, Chaturmukha ; dwse are * Called the Pkraiat. — Alafaaiter, 
analognet of the Jaina Chaumukht. ‘Wheel of the Law,’ pa 283%. and 
Biahml is stided Chatamnkha and plate. The most ftmonsniiabat In Siam 
Chatwfvaktra— teving fonr heads. u abont is miles from La|d»bnri. 



Cha?. III. 


SIAM. 


409 


erected by private persons as funeral monuments and memorials 
— altogether nearly two hundred structures, all of Which are 
shown on Foumereau’s plan ; the photographs published in his 
work show the .great extent of the remains still existing of 
the VSt Jal at Sukhodaya. The principal Phra differs sli^tly 
in design from those already described — the upper part being 
partly Chedi and partly Prang, it is raised on a platform and 
surrounded by eight smaller towers, consisting of a lower storey, 
with niche on each side containing a statue of Buddha, wiu 
a superstructure recalling the entrance doorways of Cambodia 
and Java, though the sculpture is very inferior. Above the 
architrave, carried by rectangular piers with moulded capitals, 
is a pediment enclosed with richly carved moulding, with 
dragons’ heads on each side, and in the tympanum, which 
forms a niche, is a figure of Buddha in the Nirv&na posture, 
with other figures much mutilated below. Above there is a 
second storey with a repetition of the pediment and niche to 
a smaller scale, and there may have been a third storey, rising 
about 25 feet in height, the great Phra in the centre being 
80 to 90 ft. high. Three towers of a similar kind, placed side 
1 ^ side, exist in the V&t Sisavai', also at Sukhodaya (Plate 
XLVIL), where they take the pUce of the Phra. Above a 
plain ground storey, with three angle projections, are other 
stores, of which six still exist in the western tower on the 
right, and on each face is a niche with trefoil head and N&ga 
terminations enclosing a statue and, on the angle projections, 
antefixae carved with heads of Garudas and other deities. The 
upper storeys are only slightly set back one behind the other, 
so that they may be the prototypes of the Phra-Prang already 
described. 

No description is given by Foumereau of the temples in 
A)nithi& and Lophaburi, nor are there any views of the ruins, 
but his plans suggest a close resemblance to those of Cambodia. 
Thus in the Vit Th& Sio, at Ayuthift, the central court, with 
the great Phra in the centre, is more or less identical with those of 
Beng Mdaleft and Angkor V&t. The galleries round it and the 
towers at the angles and in the centre of each front are evidently 
derived from Cambodia, and may have been carried out 
Cambodian architects. The plan of the Phra-Prang in the 
centre is similar to that of the Cambodian and Javanese temples, 
with long flights of steps to the entrance porch, and the three 
small cells or recesses on the three other sides, instead of the 
one stMp flight, as in Siam. The Bot in this temple measures 
228 fL long by 49 ft wide, and is one of the largest examples in 
Siam. In the V8t Phu Tai, also at AyuthiA, the inner court has 
galleries round it, the entrance to the same being flanked by 





Chap. III. 


SIAM. 


4 ” 


two VihSns, one on either side, the Bot being here transferred to 
the rear, or the west side, with a western entrance.* In the 
VSt na Phra*ThSt at Lophaburi (Plate XLVIII.X the plan is 
more complicated, there being an outer and inner galloied 
court, unitM by the Bot, in front of which is a porch of unusual 
dimensions, preceded by what seemed to be a triumphal entrance 
gate. Numerous Phras and other structures are shown in the 
outer galleried court, such as exist in all the plans drawn by 
Foumereau. A view of the central temple is given in P. A. 
Thompson’s ' L.otus Land ’ (p. 240), its tower bears cotuiderable 
resemblance to one of the VSt Sisaval towers (Plate XLVII.). 
The gallery is shown also on the plans of two temples at 
Sangkalok and in the VAt Xang Phuek at Sajjanilaya. An 
ex^ptional Vihfln is found in the V&t Phra-ndn, also at 
Sajjan&laya, where the roof is carried by sixteen square piers, 
four rows of piers with four in each row. 

The influence of Cambodia is shown also in the V&t Phra 
Prang Sam Ydt at Lophaburi, which consists of three sanctuaries, 
cruciform on plan, side by side, with corridors between them. 
Above each of these sanctuaries is a lofty tower with five 
receding storeys, enriched with sculptured features, similar to 
those of the V&t Sisaval at Sukhodaya (Plate XLVII.). 

The design of the Phra-Prang is found in the crowning 
members of me pagodas of Bangkok, but they are covered with 
an elaboration of detail and exuberance of coloured ornament 
that has seldom been surpassed, nor is it desirable it should be, 
for it is here carried to an extent truly barbarous (Woodcut No. 

474). 

Notwithstanding the bad taste which they display, these 
Bangkok pagodas are interesting in the history of architecture 
as exemplifying the instinctive mode in which some races build, 
and the innate and irrepressible love of architecture they display. 
But it also shows how easily these higher aspirations degenerate 
into something very like vulgarity, when exercised by a people 
in so low a stage of civilisation as the modem Siamese. 

The same remarks apply to their civic buildings : palaces and 
porticos, and even dwelling-houses, are all as rich as carving and 
gilding and painting can make them ; but, as in the pagodas, it 
is overdone and fails to please, because it verges on vulgarity. 

The typical design of all these halls and minor buildings will 
be understood from the following woodcut (No. 475)1 represent- 
ing the Hall of Audience at Bangkok. Like -all the others, it 

‘ The Bot can usually be diatingnuhed 1 it ; these are shown on many of Font- 
from the Vibin by the Pbia-Sema, or I neiean's plans, and on the plan of Vlt 
boundary stones which are set up round | Pbu Tai round the western structure. 




47S- of Audience at Bangkok. (From. Mouhot.) 


Chap. III. 


SIAM. 


413 


spire of greater or less elevation on the intersection. Sometimes 
one, two, or three smaller gables are placed in front of the first, 
each lower than the one b^ind it, so as to give a pyramidal 
effect to the whole. Generally, the subordinate gables are of the 
same width as those in the centre ; but sometimes the outer one 
is smaller, forming a porch. In the audience hall just quoted 
there are three gables each way. These may be seen on the 
right and left of the central spire in the view, but the first and 
second towards the front are hidden by the outer gable. The 
point of sight being taken exactly in front, it looks in the view as 
if there were only one in that direction. 

The Burmese adopt the same arrangement in their civil build* 
ings, and in Siam and Burma the varieties are infinite, from the 
simple pavilion with four gables, supported on four columns, to 
those with twelve and sixteen gables, combined with a greater 
complication of walls and columns for their support. 

As the Siamese are certainly advancing in civilisation, it may 
be asked. Will not their architecture be improved and purified 
by the process ? The answer is, unfortunately, too easy. The new 
civilisation is not indigenous, but an importation. The men of 
progress wear hats, the ladies French gowns, and they build 
palaces with Corinthian porticos and sash-windows. It is the 
sort of civilisation that is found in the B&z&r in Calcutta, and 
it is not desirable, in an architectural point of view, at all 
events, if, indeed, it is so in any other respect. 



CHAPTER IV. 


jAva. 

CONTENTS. 

History — Boro>Budur — ^Temples at Mendut— On the Dieng Plateau- 
At Jabang — Prambdnan — Suku — Near Melang, and at Panataran. 


There is no chapter in the whole history of Eastern art so full 
of apparent anomalies, or which to completely upsets our pre- 
conceived ideas of things as they ought to be, as that which 
treats of the architectural history of the island of J&va. In 
the Introduction, it was stated that the leading phenomenon 
in the history of India was the continued influx of race after 
race across ^the Indus into her fertile plain, but that no reflex 
wave had ever returned to redress the balance.^ This seems 
absolutely true as regards the west, and practically so in 
reference to the north, or the neighbouring countries on the 
east Tibet and Burma received their religion from India, 
not, however, either by conquest or colonisation, but by 
missionaries sent to instruct and convert This also is true of 
Ceylon, and partially so at least of Cambodia. These countries 
being all easily accessible by land, or a very short sea passage, 
it is there that we might look for migrations, if any ever took 
place, but it is not so. The one country to which they over- 
flowed was JAva, and there they colonised to such an extent as 
for nearly lOCX) years to obliterate the native arts and civilisa- 
tion, and supplant it by their own. What is still more singular 
is, that certain of the traditions assert that it was not from the 
nearest shores of India that these emigrants d^>arted, but from 
the western coast We have always been led to believe that the 
Indians hated the sea, and dreaded long sea vos^ages, yet it 
seems not improbable that the colonists of JAva came not from 
the valley of the Ganges, but from that of the Indus, and passed 

^ As for the IndUn kings none of country, lest they should be deemed 
them ever led an army out of India to guilty of injustice. ’’^Arrian, 'Indica,' 
attempt the conquest of any other ch. ix. 



Chap. IV. 


4*5 


JAVA. 

round C^lon in thousands and tens of thousands on their way 
to their distant sea-girt home. The solution of this difficulty 
may perhaps be found in the suggestion that the colonists were 
not Indians after all, in the sense in which we usually understand 
the term, but nations from the north-west — the inhabitants in 
fact of Gandh&ra and K&mboji,* who, finding no room for new 
settlements in Indian Proper, turning to their right, passed 
down the Indus, and sought a distant home on this Pearl of 
Islands. 

Whoever they were, they carried with them the bad habit of 
all their cognate races, of writing nothing, so that we have 
practically no authentic written record of the settlement and of 
its subsequent history, and were it not that they made up for 
this deficiency to a great extent by their innate love of building, 
we should hardly know of their existence in the island. They 
did, however, build and carve, with an energy and to an extent 
nowhere surpassed in their native lands, and have dignified their 
new home with imperishable records of thbir art and civilisation 
— records that will be easily read and understood, now that the 
careful survey of the antiquities has been undertaken by the 
Dutch Government under the direction of a highly qu^ified 
Commission. 

It has been said, and not without reason, that the English 
did more for the elucidation of the arts and history of J&va 
during the five years they held the island (i8ii to i8i6)than 
the Dutch had done during the previous two centuries they had 
practically been in possession. The work of the governor. Sir 
Stamford Raffles, is a model of zealous energy and critical 
acumen, such as is rarely to be found of its class in the English 
language, and is the storehouse from which the bulk of our 
knowledge of the subject till quite lately had to be derived. 
His efforts in this direction were well seconded by two Scotsmen, 
who took up the cause with almost equal zeal. One of these, 
John Crawfurd, noted down everything he came across with 
patient industiy, and accumulated vast stores of information — 
but he could not draw, and knew nothing of architecture or the 
other arts, with which he had no sympathy. The other, Colin 
Mackmzie — afterwards Surveyor-General of India — drew eveiy- 
thing he found of any architectural importance, and was the 
most industrious and successful collector of drawings and 
manuscripts that India has ever known ; but he could not 

^ The Kimbojas were a non* Aryan Edicts, — 'Epigraphia Indica,' yoI. ii. 
people inhabiting the Kibul valley. They pp. 447 ^-; * Bombay Gasetteer/ vol. L 
are mentioned in the 5th and 13th Aroka pt. i| pp. 49of. 



4i6 


FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


write. The few essays he attempted are meagre in the 
extreme, and nine-tenuis of his knowledge perished with him. 
Had these two men been able to work together to the end, 
th^ would have left little for future investigation. There «ras, 
however, still a fourth labourer in the field — Dr. John L^den — 
who, had his life been spared, could have easily assimilated the 
work of his colleagues, and with bis own marvellous genius for 
acquiring languages and knowledge of all sorts, would certainly 
have lifted the veil that shrouded so much of Javan history in 
darkness, and left very little to be desired in this respect He 
died, however, almost before his work was begun, and the time 
was too short, and the task too new, for the others to do all that 
with more leisure and better preparation they might have 
accomplished. 

During the last ninety years the Dutch have done a good 
deal to redeem the neglect of the previous centuries, but, as has 
happened in the sister island of Ceylon, it was for long without 
system, and no master mind appeared to give unity to the whole, 
or to extract from what is done the essence, which is all the 
public care to possess. The Dutch Government, however, 
published in- 1S74, in four great folio volumes, 400 plates, from 
Mr. Wilsen’s drawings, of the architecture and sculptures of Boro* 
Budur : and the Batavian Society of Arts and Sciences published 
sixty • five 'photc^apbic plates of the same monument ; and 
as Dr Leemans of Leiden added a volume of text, historical 
and descriptive, there is no monument in the East so fully 
and so well illustrated as this one, and probably none that 
better deserves the pains that have been bestowed upon it. 
The same Society published also 333 photographs of other 
Javan antiquities and temples, but, unfortunately, for the most 
part without any accompanying text. A thoroughly well 
qualified antiquat)^, Heer Brumund, was employed to. visit the 
localities, and write descriptions, but unfortunately he died 
before his task was half complete. A fragment of his work is 
published in the 33rd volume of the ‘Transactions* of the 
Society, but it is only a fragment, and just sufficient to make us 
long for more. At the same time an Oriental scholar. Dr. 
R. H.Th. Friederich, was employed by Government to translate 
the numerous inscriptions that abound in the island, which 
would probably explain away all the difficulties in the history 
of the island and its monuments, but none have appeared since 
some of these were published in the 26th volume of the 
' Verhandelingen ’ in 1856. 

Within the last twenty years, however, many works have 
been published, which add considerably to our knowledge, one 



Chap. IV. JAVA. 417 

of the earliest being that of Herr J. W. Ijzerman^ on the 
country between Surakarta and Jogjakarta (1891). His work 
includes all the temples in the vicinity of Pramb&nan and a con- 
jectural restoration of the temple of Kali-Bening, unfortunately 
drawn to so large a scale that the elevation is on two sheets as 
also the plan. An excellent map of the country also is given 
with four photographs of the monastery of Sari, which are of 
great interest. Dr. J. Groneman,^ working in the same district, 
has given sixty-two photographs of one of the most important 
temples, that at Loro Jonggrang. The plan of this temple 
is given in a third work by Albert Tissandier,* who spent some 
time both in J&va and Cambodia measuring the temples of which 
the plans are published in his book, as also many valuable photo- 
gravures. The temples on the Dieng Plateau, described in a 
work by Herr von Saher,* had already been photographed by 
the Batavian Society, from which series some have been repro- 
duced. Two monographs have also been published, one by Herr 
Kersjies and G. den Hamer ^ on the small temple of Mendut, 
2 miles from Boro-Budur, and the other, by Dr. J. E. A. 
Brandes, as the first volume of the Archaeological Survey on 
the temple of Jago in the eastern part of the island,® followed 
by a second volume on Singasari and Panataran, in all cases 
with much architectural detail and excellent plans. A large 
number of plans and elevations have also from time to time 
been published in the Reports of the Government Commission 
appointed in 1901,^ of which five volumes have appeared. 
The same subject is also treated in General de Beyli6*s wprk,® 
dealing generally with architecture in India and the extreme 
East. 


* ‘ Beschrijving der Oudheden nabij de 
Soerakarla en Djogdjakarta,’ door J. W. 
Ijzerman, met Atlas, 4to. S’Gravenhage, 
1891. The Atlas consists of map and 32 
folding plates, and in the text are 15 
photographs on 10 plates. 

^ * Tjandi Parambanan op midden Java 
na de Outgraving,’ door Dr. J. Groneman, 
met 62 Lichtdrukken. Leiden, 1893. 

* Albert Tissandier, *Cambodge et 
Java,’ Paris, 1896. 

^ * De Versierende Kunsten in Neder- 
landsch Oost-lndie einige hindoemonu- 
menten op midden Java,’ door £. A. Von 
Saher, i^. 

” ^ De Tjandi Mendoet voor de 
restauratie,’ door B.^ersjies en G. den 
Hamer (with 22 photo-plates), 1903. 

* Of the Archaeological Survey under the 


Government Commission have been pub- 
lished Tjandi Djago ; *Archseologisch 
Onderzoek op Java en Madura,’ door Dr. 
J. L. A. Brandes (with 104 photo-plates, 
24 sheets of drawings and a map), vol. i. 
1^4; and 'Bes^rijving van Tjandi 
Singasari en Wolkentooneelen van Pana- 
taran,’ door H. L. Leydie Melville en J. 
Knebel (with X13 photo-plates, 19 
drawings and 2 maps), vol. ii. 1909. 

^ *l<apporten van de Commtssie in 
Nederlanasch-Indie vobr Oudhcidkundig 
Onderzoek op Java en Madura,’ 1901- 
1906; also, ‘Tonnet (Martine) Helwerk 
der Commissie in Nederlandsch- Indie 
voor Oudheidkundig Onderzoek op Java 
en Madura,’ 1907. 

* Beylie (Genl. L. de), * L’ Architecture 
Hindoue en extreme Orient,’ Paris, 1907. 



4i8 further INDIA. Book VIII. 

History. 

Amidst the confusion of their annals, it is rather fortunate that 
the Javans make no claim to more remote political history than 
the fabled arrival in the island of Adi 5 &ka, the founder of the 
Saka era, in A.D. 79.> It is true that in the 8th or pth century 
thev obtained an abridged translation of the Mah&bh8rata, and, 
under the title of the ‘ Br&ta Yuddha,’ adopted it as a part of 
their own history, assigning sites on the island for all- the 
principal scenes of that celebrated strug^^le which took place 
in the neighbourhood of Delhi and Hastin&pura, adding only 
their own favourite Gendara Desa (Gandh&ra), to which they 
assigned a locality on the north of the island.* It is thus, 
unfortunately, that history is written in the East, and because 
it is so written, the Javans next thought it necessary to bring 
.Siliv^hana, the founder of the 5aka era, to their island also. 
Having adopted his era, their childish vanity required his 
presence there, but as it is certain he never saw the island, 
his visit is fabled to have resulted in failure, and said to have 
left no traces of his presence. 

Leaving these fabulous ^es, we come to a tradition that 
seems to rest on a surer foundation. '“In the year 525 (A.D. 
603 or 599), it being foretold to a king of Kuj’iAt, or Gujar&t, 
that his couhtry would decay and go to ruin, he resolved to send 
his son to J&va.* He embarked with about 5000 followers in six 
large and about icx} small vessels, and after a voyage of four 
months, reached an island they supposed to be J&va; but 
finding themselves mistaken, re-embarked, and finally settled 
at Mat4rem, in the centre of the island they were seeking.” 
“ The prince now found that men alone were wanting to make 
a great and flourishing state ; he accordingly applied to Gujar&t 
for assistance, when his father, delighted at his success, sent 
him sc reinforcement of 2000 people.” “From this period,” 
adds the chronicle, “Java was known and celebrated as a 
kingdom ; an extensive commerce was carried on with Gujar&t 
and other countries, and the bay of Mat&rem was filled with 
adventurers from all parts.” ^ 

Daring the sovereignty of this prince and his two immediate 
successors, “ the country advanced in fame and prosperity. The 
city of Mendang Kamfilan, since called Pramb&nan, increased 


^ In Java this era dates from a.d. 75, 
but it may have been altered at a late 
date.— W. von Humboldt, *Ueber die 
Kawi Spracbeauf Java,’ Bd. i. S. 10, mte. 

“ Sir S. Raffles^ * History of Java,' pi. 
24 ; text, vol. i. p. 465, 8vo. edition. 


” Lassen rejects the statement that the 
emigrants came from Gujarat or Western 
India, in favour of another, perhaps 
earlier, tradition that they came from 
Kalin^.— * Indische Alterthumskunde,’ 
Bd. ii. (and. ed.), Ss. 1066 and 1085, 



Chap. IV. 


HISTORY. 


4*9 


in size and splendour : artists, particularly in stone and metals, 
arrived from distant countries, and temples, the ruins of wUch 
are still extant, were constructed both at this place and at 
Boro-Budur, in Kedu, during this period by artists invited 
from India.” ^ 

This is supported by an inscription found at Menankabu, 
in Sumatra, wherein a king, who styles himself Mah&rija 
Adir&ja Adityadharma King of Prathama — the first or greatest 
Jiva — ^boastS' of his conquests and prowess, and he proclaims 
himself a Buddhist, a worshipper of the five Dhy&ni Buddhas, 
and records his having erected a great seven-storeyed vih&ra 
in honour of Buddha.^ This inscription is dated fifty years 
later, or in A.D. 656, but its whole tone is so completely con- 
firmatory of the traditions just quoted from Sir S. Raffles, that 
there seems little doubt the two refer to events occurring about 
the same time. 

The only other event of importance in these early times 
bearing on our subject is Fah Hian's visit to the island in A.D. 
414, on his way from Ceylon to China by sea. It might pethaps 
be supposed that Jiva the Less, or Sumatra, was really the 
island he visited. It certainly was the labadios, or Y&vadwtpa, 
of Ptolemy, and just possibly the Jiva the Less of the Arab 
geographers and of Marco Polo but the circumstances of the 
voy^e afford no details to point rather to this island than 
to J&va proper. “In this country,” he says, “Heretics and 
Br&hmans flourish ; but the Law of Buddha is not much 
known.”* As he resided there five months, and had been 
fourteen years in India, he knew perfectly what he was speaking 
about 

That there were Brdhmans in these islands before the advent 
of the Buddhist emigrants in the 7th century seems more than 
probable from the traditions about the Br&hman Tritresta or 
Tritistri, collected by Sir S. Raffles* and others; but, if so, 
they were Aryan Br&hmans, belonging to some of the non- 
building races, who may have gone there as missionaries 
seeking converts, but hardly as colonists or conquerors. Indeed 
all over the island circles of stone are found, either wholly un- 
fashioned or carved into rude representations of HindQ deities 


^ Sir S. Raffles* ‘ History of Java,* vol. 
ii. 3 vo. edition, pp. 87 // seqa. ; Lassen’s, 
* Indische AUerthumskunae,’ Bd. ii. 
(a Aufl.). Ss. 1059 €t s$qa. 

^ I am perfectly aware tnat tins is not 
borne out by the translation of this in- 
scription given bv Dr. Friederich in vol. 
XXVI. of the * Vernandeltngen * : but being 
dissatisfied with its unmeaningness, I 


took it to my friend, Professor Eggeling, 
and he fully confirms my view as al^ve 
expressed. 

^ Yule’s ‘ Marco Polo,* and, cd. vol. ii. 
pp. 266 €t seqq. 

^ Beal’s translation, p. 169, ' Buddhist 
Records,* vol. L pu Ixxxi. 

• Raflto, voL li. pp. 77 it ttqq , ; but 
see Lassen, ui sup.^ pp. 1063 et uqq. 



4*0 


FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


— so rude that even Ganera can hardly sometimes be recc^ised ; 
and it frequently requires an almost Hindi! trustfuiness to 
believe that these rude stones sometimes represent even .Siva 
and Vishnu and other gods of the HindQ Pantheon.^ It seems 
as if the early Br&hmans tried to teach their native converts 
to fashion gods for themselves, but, having no artistic knowledge 
of their own to communicate, failed miserably in the attempt 
The Buddhists, on the contrary, were artists, and came in such 
numbers that they were able to dispense with native assistance, 
nearly, if not altogether. 

The next recorded event that seems to bear on our investiga* 
tions is the mission of the children of Deva KasOma to Kling or 
India, in order that they might be educated in the Brahmanical 
religion.* This event took place in A.D. 914, and seems to point 
to a time when the Buddhist religion, as evidenced by the 
erection of Boro-Budur, had died out, and the quasi-Hindi! 
temples of Prambdnan and Singasari had superseded those of 
the Buddhists. Those at Prambdnan are said to have been 
completed in a.d. 1097, which seems an extremely probable 
date for the Chandi Sewu or “ iock> temples.” From that 
period till the beginning of the 15th century, the series of 
monuments — many of them with dates upon them* — are 
tolerably complete, and there will be no difficulty in classifying 
them whenever the task is fairly undertaken. 

At this time we find the island divided into two kingdoms ; 
one, having its capital at Pajajaram, about 40 miles east of 
Batavia, occupied the whole of the western or Sunda par£ of 
the island. The Sundas, however, were not a building race, 
and the portion occupied by them need not be again referred 
to here. It contains no buildings except the rude Hindi! 
remains above referred to. 

The eastern portion of the island was occupied by the 
kingdom of Majapahit, founded, apparently, about the year 
130a It soon rose to a higher pitch of power and splendour 
than any of the preceding kingdoms, and the capital was 
adorned with edifices of surpassing magnificence, but mostly 
in brick, so that now they are little more than a mass of 
indistinguishable ruins. When, however, it had lasted little 
more than a century, Muhammadan missionaries appeared on 

' About half of the earlier photographs photographs of the Batavian Society use 
of the Batavian Society are filled with 53 instead of 78 or 79 as the factor for 
representations of these rude deities, converting 5 aka dates into those of the 
which resemble more the images of Christian Era. As, however, Brumund, 
Easter Island than anything Indian, Leemans, and all the best modern authors 

^ Raffles, * History of Java,' vol. ii. use the Indian Index, it is here adhered 
p, 93. to throughout. 

‘ Tlie compilers of the catalogue of the 



Chap. IV 


HISTORY. 


4ai 


the island, and gradually — ^not by conquest or the sword, but 
by persuasion — induced the inhabitants of the island to forsake 
the religion of their forefathers and adopt that of the Arabian 
Prophet In the year 14^9 the Muhammadans had become so 
powerful that the city of Majapahit was taken by them by 
storm, and the last HindQ dynasty of the island overthrown, 
and those that remained of the foreign race driven to take 
refuge in the island of Bali.^ 

Then occumd what was, perhaps, the least-expected event 
in all "this strange eventful history.” It is as if the masons 
had thrown away their tools, and the chisels had dropped from 
the hands of the carvers. From that time forward no building 
was erected in J^va, and no image carved, that is worth even 
a passing notice. At a time when the Muhammadans were 


476. THE PRINCIPAL TEMPLES OF JAVA. 



A. Dieng Plateau. B. Pramb&nan. i. Chandi Plaoban. 2. Chandi Sewu. 
3. Chandi Lumbang. 4. Chandi Loro Jong-grang. 5. Chandi Sari. 
6. Chandi Sojiewan. 7. Chandi Kali-Rening. 


adorning India with monuments -of surpassing magnificence no 
one in J&va thought of building either a mosque, or a tomb, 
or a palace that would be deemed respectable in any second- 
class state in any part of the world. 

For nearly nine centuries (a.d. 603-1479) foreign colonists 
had persevered in adorning the island with edifices almost 
unrivalled elsewhere of their class ; but at the end of that time, 
as happened so often in India, their blood had become diluted, 
their race impure, their energy effete, and, as if at the touch of 
a magician’s wand, they disappear. The inartistic native races 


' These latter dates arc taken from Katlle.s and Crawfurd, l>ui as they are perfectly 
well ascertained, no reference seems needful. 



4a* FURTHER INDIA. Book VIII. 

resumed their sway, and art vanished from the land, never, 
prottably, again to reappear. 

Boro-Budur. 

There may be older monuments in the island of Jiva than 
Boro-Budur, but, if so, they have not yet been brought to light. 
The tude stone monuments of the western or Sunda end of the 
island may, of course, be older, though I doubt it ; but they are 
not architectural, and of real native art we know nothing. 

When Sir S. Raffles and J. Crawfurd wrote their works, no 
means existed of verifying dates by comparison of styles, and 
it is, therefore, little to be wondered at if the first gives 
A.D. 1560,^ and the second A.D. 1344* as the date of this 
building. The former, however, was not deceived by this date, 
inasmuch as at page 67 he says, “ The edifices at Singasari near 
Malang were probably executed in the 8th or 9th century. 
Thqr nearly resemble those of Pramb&nan and Boro-Budur. 
It is probable the whole were constructed about the same 
period, or within the same century; at any rate, between the 
yth and 9th century of the Christian Era.” This, perhaps, errs 
a little ffle other way. Heer Brumund, on historical grounds, 
places Boro-Budur “ in the 9th, perhaps even in the 8th century 
of the ChHstian Era.”* On architectural grounds I would 
almost unhraitatingly place it a century earlier. The style and 
character of its sculptures are so nearly identical with those of 
the latest caves at Ajanti (No. 26, for instance), and in the 
western Gh&ts, that they look as if they were executed by the 
same artists, and it is difficult to conceive any great interval of 
time elapsing between the execution of the two. If I am 
correct in placing the caves in the first half of the 7th century, 
we can hardly be far wrong in assigning the commencement, at 
least, of the Javan monument to the second half of that century. 
This being so, I am very much inclined to believe that Boro- 
Budur may be the identical seven-storeyed vihftra, mentioned 
by Aditya-dharma in his inscription at Menankabu.* Its being 
found in Sumatra does not appear to me to militate against this 
view. Aroka’s inscriptions are found in Gandh&ra, Saurftshtra, 
Mysore, and Orissa, but not in Bihftr. At home he was known : 
but it may be that he desired to place a permanent record of his 
greatness in the remote portions of his dominions. The date 

' 'History of Jav»,’ vol. ii. p. 85. P- SS^). , 

* ' Dictionary of Indian Archipelago,’ * Ante, p. 419. Also ' Verhandelingen. 
p. 66. etc., vol. sxvi. pp, 31 it stqq. One of his 

* 'Boro-Boadottr,’parDr. C. Leemans. inscriptions — the fourth— was found in 
Leyden, 1874, p. 506 (French translation, Jdva proper. 



3 



tion of Temple of Boro-Budur. (From an unpublished Plate intended for Sir Stamford Raffles* * History of Java. ) 



434 


FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


of the inscription, A.D. 656, accords so exactly with the age I 
would assign to it from other sources, that it may at least stand 
for the present. Of course, it was not completed at once, or 
in a few years. The whole group, with Chandi Pawon and 
Mendut, may probably extend over a century and a half — down, 
say, to A.D. 800, or over the whole golden age of Buddhism in 
the island. 

It certainly is fortunate for the student of Buddhist art in 
India that Boro-Budur (Woodcuts Nos. 477 and 478) has 
attracted so much attention; for, even now, the four folio 
volumes of plates recently devoted to its illustration do not 
contain one figure too many for the purpose of rendering its 
peculiarities available for scientific purposes: the fact teing 
that this monument was erected just at the time when the 



479, Section of one of the smaller 
Domes at Boro-Budur. 



480. Elevation of principal Dome at Boro- 
Budur. (From Sir S. Raffles* 

' History of Java.’) 


Buddhist system attained its greatest development, and just 
before its fall. It thus contains within itself a complete epitome 
of all we learn from other sources, and a perfect illustration of 
all we know of Buddhist art or ritual. The thousand years 
were complete, and the story that opened upon us at Bharaut 
closes practically at Boro-Budur. 

- The fundamental formative idea of the Boro-Budur monu- 
ment is that of a d&gaba with five procession-paths. These, 
however, have become square in plan instead of circular ; and 
instead of one great domical building in the centre we have 
here seventy-two smaller ones, each containing the statue of 
a Buddha (Woodcut No. 479), visible through an open cage-like 
lattice-work ; and one larger one in the centre, which was quite 
solid externally (Woodcut No. 480), but had a cell in its centre, 
which may have contained a relic or some precious object. 
There is, however, no record of anything being found in it when 
it was broken into. All this is, of course, an immense develop- 
ment beyond anything we have hitherto met with, and a sort 


Chap. IV. 


BORO-BUDUR. 


4*5 


of half-way house between the majestic simplicity of the 
Abhayagiri at Anur&dhapura, and the somewhat tawdiy com- 
plexity of the pagoda at Mingfin (Woodcut No. 448). 

With the idea of a digaba, however, Boro - Budur also 
combines that of a vihira, such as that illustrated by Woodcuts 
Nos. 89, 90. There the cells, though only copied solid in the 
rock, still simulated the residences of the monks, and had not 
yet advanced to the stage we find in the Gandh&ra monasteries, 
where the cells of monks had become niches for statues. Here 
this is carried further than in ai^ example found in India. 
The cells of the M&mallapuram example are here repeated on 
every face, but essentially as niches, and are occupied by 436 
statues of Buddha, seated in the usual cross-legged attitude. In 
this respect Boro-Budur is in advance of the Takht-t-Bahai, 
which is the monument in India that most nearly approaches 
to it in mythological significance. So great, inde^, is the 
similarity between the two, that whatever date we assign to the 
one drags with it that of the other. It would, indeed, be. 
impossible to understand how, in the 7'th century. Buddhism 
had been so far developed towards the modem Nepalese and 
Tibetan systems if we had not these Gandhira monasteries to 
fall back upon. On the other hand, having so similar a 
Buddhist development in JSva in the 7th century, it seems 
difficult to separate the monuments of the north-west of India 
from it by any very long interval of time. 

As will be observed from the plan and elevation (Woodcuts 
477i 47^1 page 423), the monument may be described either as 
a seven or a nine-storeyed vih&ra, according as we reckon the 
platform on which the seventy-two small d&gabas stand as one 
or three storeys. Its basement measures over 400 ft. across, 
but the real temple is only 300 ft. from angle to angle either 
way. It is not, however, either for its dimensions or the beauty 
of its architectural design that Boro-Budur is so remarkable, 
as for the sculptures that line its galleries. These extend to 
nearly 5,000 ft. — almost an English mile — and as there are 
sculptures on both faces, we have nearly 10,000 lineal ft. of 
bas-reliefs ; or, if we like to add those which are in two storeys, 
we have a series of sculptures,' which, if arranged consecutively 
in a row, would extend over nearly 3 miles of ground. Most 
of them, too, are singularly well preserved ; for when the Javans 
were converted to Muhammadanism it was not in anger, and 
they were not urged to destroy what they had before reverenced ; 
they merely n^lected them, and, except for earthquakes, these 
monuments would now be nearly as perfect as when first erect^ 

The outer face of the basement, though extremely rich in 
architectural ornaments and figure-sculptures, is of comparatively 



FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


4a6 

little historical importance. The first enclosed — or, as the 
Dutch call it, the second — galler)^ is, of all the five, the most 
interesting historically. On its inner wall the whole life of 
5 &kyamuni is portrayed in 120 bas>reliefs of the most elaborate 
character. The first twenty>four of these are occupied with 
scenes in the Tusita heavens, or events that took place before 
the birth. In the twenty-fifth we have Mayi’s dream, depicted 
exactly as it is at Bharaut or Sinchi, 800 or 900 years earlier. 
In the following sculptures it is easy to recognise all the familiar 
acenes of his life, his marriage, and domestic happiness, till he 
meets the four predictive signs ; his subsequent departure from 
home, and assumption of the ascetic garb ; his life in the forest ; 
his preaching in the Deer-garden at Benares — the whole Lalita 
Vistara, in short, portrayed with very few variations from the 
pictures we already possess from Gandh&ra to Amar&vatl, with 
this singular exception : in all Indian examples the birth and 
the Nirvina are more frequently repeated than any other events ; 
for some reason, not easily guessed, they are omitted here, 
though all the events that preceded and followed them are 
minutely detailed.^ Below these bas-reliefs depicting the life 
of Buddha is. an equally extensive series of I20 bas-reliefs of 
subjects taken from the JAtaka, all of which may be easily 
identified. 

In the three galleries above this Buddhism is represented 
as a religion. Groups of Buddhas — three, five, or nine — are 
repeated over and over again, mixed with Bodhisattwas and 
saints of all sorts. Among these, the five Dhyini, Buddhas 
are conspicuous in all, perhaps more than all, the variety of 
manifestations which are known in Nep&l and Tibet, which, 
as Lassen points out, almost inevitably leads to the conclusion 
that this form of faith was introduced from Nep&l or Western 
Tibet* 

Whether this is exactly so or not, no one probably who 
is familiar with Buddhist art in its latest age on the western 
side of India will probably doubt that it was from these parts 
that the builders of Boro-Budur migrated. The character of 
the sculptures, and the details of the ornamentation in Cave 26 
at Ajantd, and I'j at Nilsik, and more especially in the later 
caves at Kanheri in Salsette, at Kondivtd, M&g&thinA, and other 

! daces in that neighbourhood, are so nearly identical with what is 
bund in the Javan monument, that the identity of the workman- 

' All these, or nearly all, have been Foucher, ‘Notes d’Arcl)eologie Boudd- 
identifiedbyDr. Leemansintheteatthat hique’ in ‘Bull, de I’Ecole Frangaise 
aoeoomnies the plates. See also Pleyte, d’extr£me>Otient ’ tom. ix. 1909, pp. iff. 
'^e Buddha>legende in den Sealpturen * ‘ Indische Alterthumskunde,’ vol. iv. 
des tempcls von Boiro-Bnedoer,’ 1901 ; p. 467. 



Chap. IV. 


BORaBUDUR. 


4»7 


ship is unmistakable. It is true we have no monument in 
that part of India to which we can point that at all resembles 
Boro-Budur in design, but then it must be borne in mind that 
there is not a single structural Buddhist building now existing 
within the limits of the cave region of Western India. It seems 
absurd, however, to suppose that so vast a community confined 
themselves to caves, and caves only. They must have had 
structural buildings of some sort in their towns and elsewhere, 
but scarcely a fragment of any such now exists, and we are 
forced to g6 to GandhAra, in the extreme north-west, for our 
nearest examples. As already pointed out, there are many 
points of similarity between JamAlgarhi, and more especially 
between Takht-t-Bahai and Boro-Budur; and if any ardiitect, 
who was accustomed to such work, would carefully draw and 
restore these northern monasteries, many more might become 
apparent^ We know enough even now to render this morally 
certain, though hardly sufficient to prove it in the face of mu^ 
that may be brought forward by those who care to doubt it. 
Meanwhile, my impression is, that if we knew as much of these 
GandhAra monasteries as we know of Boro-Budur, we could 
tell the interval of time that separated them, probably within 
half a century at least. 

Stretching such evidence as we at present have, as far as 
it will bear, we can hardly bring the Takht-!-Bahai monastery 
within one century of Boro-Budur. It may be two — and 
JamAlgarhi is still one or two centuries more distant in time. 
But, on the other hand, if we had not these GandhAra 
monasteries to refer to, it would bP difficult to believe that 
the northern system of Buddhism could have been so completely 
developed, even in the 8th century, as we find it at Boro-Budur. 
It is this wonderful progress that has hitherto made the more 
modem date of that monument probable — it looks so much in 
advance of anything we know of in Indian Buddhism. But 
all this we must now revise by -the light these Javan monuments 
throw <Hi the subject. 

Being nearly a pyramid, situated on the summit of a hill, 
there were no constructive difficulties encountered in the erection 
of Boro-Budur, and it is consequently no wonder that it now 
remains so entire, in spite of its being, like all Javan build- 
ings, erected wholly without mortar. It is curious to observe, 
however, how faithfully its architects adhered to the Indian 
superstition regarding arches. They did not even think it 
necessary to cut off the angles of me corbel-stones, so as to 


* General Cunning^iam!* drawings are not enough for any one who is a stranger 
to the subject. 



FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


4a8 

simulate an arch, though using the pointed>arched foms of 
the old chaitya caves of the west. The two systems are well 
exemplified in the following woodcut (No. 481), but it runs 



481. ^’iew of Central Entrance and Stairs at Boro-Budur. (From a Lithographic Plate. 

throughout. All the niches are surmounted by arch forms 
—circular, elliptical, or pointed — but all are constructed 
horizontally, and it miy be added that, in nine cases out of 




Chap. IV. 


MENDUT. 


439 

ten, the keystones are adorned with a mask, as in this last 
example. 

About two and a half miles from Boro-Budur is a small 
temple of a different class known as Chandi Mendut. It stands 
on a platform lift, high, measuring 71 ft. wide and 83 ft deep. 
The temple itself is cruciform, measuring 29 ft. 6 in. wide and 
41 ft. 7 in. deep, the porch projecting more than is usual. This 
temple preserves its stone roof, the cell is 23 ft. square inside 
and at a height of 13 ft from the pavement horizontal courses 
of stone, thirty-seven in number and 28 ft. in height projecting 
one in front of the other, from an inverted pyramid of steps 
which is terminated by a hollow cone. Externally the roof still 
rises to a height of about 50 ft above the platform, and con- 
sisted probably of three storeys with a series of twenty-four 
miniature pagodas round the lower storey, sixteen around the 
second storey, eight round the third half sunk in an octagonal 
wall, being crowned with a larger d&gaba. The walls are deco- 
rated with bas-relief figures of Hindi! deities, groups of three or 
five in the larger central panels and single figures in the side 
panels all under canopies of slight projection. The sides of the 
platform are carved with figures and ornament in a series of 
panels. Inside the cell are three colossal figures about ii ft. 
high each. The central one is Buddha, curly-headed of course, 
and clad in a diaphanous robe. The two other colossi, having 
only two arms each, are almost certainly intended for Bodhisat- 
twas. These three may have been placed in the cells at a later 
date. On one of the faces, externally, is Lakshmi, eight-armed, 
seated on a lotus, with attendants. On another face is a figure, 
four-armed seated cross-legged on a lotus, the stem of which is 
supported by two figures with seven-headed snake-hoods. It is 
in fact a slightly altered repetition of a group inserted among the 
older sculptures on the fagade of the cave at K&rl6. That 
insertion I have always believed to be of the 6th or 7th century ; 
this group is certainly slightly more modern. The curious part 
of the matter is, that the Mendut example is so very much more 
refined and perfect than that at K&rl6. The one seems the feeble 
effort of an expiring art ; the Javan example is as refined and 
elegant as anything in the best ages of Indian sculpture. The 
same remarks apply to the sacred tree under which the figure is 
seated. Like all the similar conventional trees at Boro-Budur, 
they are complicated and refined beyond any examples known 
in India. 

The great interest, however, of this little temple arises from 
the fact that it almost certainly succeeded immediately to Boro- 
Budur. If it is correct to assume A.D. 650-750 as the period 
during which that temple was erected, this one must have been 



430 


FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


built between A.D. 750 and A.D. 800. It shows, too, a progress in 
design at a time when Buddhist art in India was ma»ed by 
decay ; and it exhibits such progress in mythology, that though 
there can be no doubt as to the purity of the Buddhism of Boro* 
Budur, any one might fairly argue that this temple belonged 
either to that religion or to Hinduism. It is in fact one of 
those compromises that in India might be called Jaina; in 
other words, one of those transitional examples of which we 
have many in J&va, but the want of which leaves such a gap 
in our histoiy of architecture in India.^ 

Close to Chandi Mendut is another small temple of similar 
desim known as Chandi Pawon;* it is raised on a platform 
28 m square and 5 ft. 6 in. high. The. plan of the temple is 
cruciform, being 17 ft. in its extreme dimension, and when 
perfect was probably about 30 ft. high. It was apparently 
surmounted by two storeys witii eight miniature d&gabas above 
the ground storey and a large d&gaba forming the summit 

DIENG PLATEAU. 

About 35 miles to the north of Boro>Budur is a group of 
temples on the tableland at the foot of Mount Prahu. They 
consist only of simple sanctuaries and are not remarkable for 
the beauty' of their details when compared with those of the 
buildings we have just been describing : but they are interesting 
to the Indian antiquary, because they are Indian temples pure 
and simple and dedicated to Indian gods. So far, we feel ht 
home again ; but what these temples tell us further is, that if 
JAva got her Buddhism from Gujar&t and the mouths of the 
Indus, she got her Hinduism from Telingana and the mouths 
of the Krishna. These Dieng temples do not show a trace of 
the curved-lined xikharas of Orissa pr of the Indo- Aryan style. 
Had the Hindds gone to Jftva from the valley of the Ganges, 
it is almost impossible thty should not have carried with them 
some examines of this favourite form. It is found in Burma 
and Siam, out no trace of it is found anywhere in J&va. 

Nor are these temples Dravidian in any proper sense of 
the word. They are in storeys, but not with cells, nor any 
reminiscences of such ; but they are Chalukyan, in a clear and 
direct meaning of the term. The building most like these 
Javan temples illustrated in the preceding pages is that at 
BuchhanapalU (Woodcut No. 254), which might pass without 
remark in JAva if deprived of its peristylar portico. It, however, 

* Riipmten van de Coinmissie Nedcf' Kerajes en C. Den Hamer (with 23 
landidiJndie’ IM3, p. 64, and platei 46- platea), 1903. 

5S: 'De Tjanai Mendoeti’ door B. ■ /<»f 4 pp. 73ff. and plates 59-61. 



Chap. IV. 


DIENG PLATEAU 


431 


like all the Chalukyan Temples we know of in India, especially 
in the Nizam’s territoiy, is subsequent to the loth, most of them 
belonging to the 13th century. 

The most important and best preserved of these Dieng 
Plateau temples is the Chandi Bhlma in Plate XLIX. It is square 
on plan, with a 
projecting porch 
on the west side, 
andis surmounted 
by a series of five 
storeys, each set 
back so as to con- 
stitute a pyra - 
midal roof, which 
is in accord with 
the interior con- 
struction, consist- 
ing of horizontal 
courses of stone 
corbelled out each 
in front of the 
course below till 
they meet at the 
top. It might be 
noted here, that 
decoration of the 
storeys as they 
rise diminishes in 
scale so as to in- 
crease the ap - 
parent height. 

The summit was 
probably covered 
with the lotus 
plant, of which 

examples are 
shown in bas- Section of Temple of Chandi Bhlma. 

relief sculptures. 

On each of the storeys are sunken niches with figures of Buddha 
in them,^ three niches on each side of the two lower storeys, 
one niche in each centre above and at the angles of the third 
storey, and a lotus finial, probably a small replica of the 
crowning feature of the temple. 

* Van le Coq, found ai Turfan, in i built in brick — there al&o were five 
Chinese Turkestan, an example of a { storeys each in situ with niches whi^ 
temple of precisely similar design, but i had once contained figures of Buddha. 



43 * 


FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


What is most remarkable in this temple of Bhfma is its 
classic character. The ogee mouldings and their decoration, 
the corbel bed-mould of the principd cornice and the swags 
underneath and the egg and tongue mouldings round the niches, 
are all direct transcripts from classic sources, such as those of 
Gandhira. That which, however, is not in accordance with 
classic design is the cutting of the doorway through the 
mouldings of the podium ; this in a more recent example, 
the Chandi Arjuna (Plate L.), is avoided, the doorway being 
reached by a short flight of steps below, and curved stone 
rails terminated with rising Niga heads. 

It is a remarkable fact that in the temples of jdva there 
is not a single example of a pier or column. When we think of 
the thousands that were employed by the Dravidians in the 
south of India, and the Jains in the north-west, it is curious 
they escaped being introduced here. The early style of Orissa, 
as mentioned above, is nearly astylar ; but in the J&va temple 
this,,i$ absolutely so, and, so far as 1 know, is the only im- 
pormnt style in the world of which this can be predicated. 
What is not so curious, but is also interesting, is, that there 
is not a true arch in the whole island. In the previous pages, 
the Hindil horror of an arch has often been alluded to; but 
then they frequently got out of the difficulty by the use of 
wood or -iron. These materials, however, do not seem to have 
been used in any Javanese temple, though the wooden origin 
of many of the decorative features can clearly be traced in 
them. Thus the pilaster strips which flank the doorways 
and the dwarf pilasters dividing the sculptured panels of the 
temple podium or platform are all enriched with boldly 
moulded capitals, bases, and central bands, evidently derived 
from wooden piers or columns. The bas-reliefs also at Boro- 
Budur (Plate LI.) and elsewhere abound in representations 
of pagodas and small houses, in which both the pier and 
column* are clearly shown carrying wooden superstructures, 
and in some cases an upper storey with timber roof, carried 
aloft on a series of moulded piers or columns. Although, 
therefore, in the temples of Jiva all the architecture is in 
stone the decorative features are largely derived from secular 
buildings in timber. 

It may also be mentioned here, while describing the negative 
characteristics of Javan art, that no mortar is ever used as a 
cement in these temples. It is not that they were ignorant 
of the use of lime, for many of their buildings are plastered 
and painted on the plaster, but it was never employed to give 
strength to construction. It is owing to this that so many of 
t^ir buildings are in so ruinous a state. In an island wtere 




CHANDl KALI-BENING 




CHANDl PANATARAN 



CHANDl PANATARAN 





FIG. 1. MEMORIAL AT BLITAR, NEAR PANATARAN FIG. 2. TEMPLE AT PANATARAN 




BUDDHIST TEMPLE, T’SIANG CHA 



PA-Ll CHWANG PAGODA, 
NEAR PEKIN 
(From R.K. Douglas’ book, 
‘Society of China’) 







TEMPLE, ENTRANCE GATE, AND PAGODA OF h6RIUJI 





THE YU-MEI-MON GATE, NIKKU 




THE BELFRY AT KAWA SAKI 
[From J. Baltzer] 






castle of YEDO (TOKIO) 







Chap. IV. 


PRAMBANAN 


433 


earthquakes are frequent, a very little shake reduces a tall 
temple to a formless heap in a few seconds. If cemented, 
they might have been cracked, but not so utterly ruined as 
they now are.* 

Be this as it may, the temple architecture of Jftva is 
probably the only one of which it can be said that it reached 
a high degree of perfection without using either columning, or 
arches, or mortar in any of its buildings. 

Chandi Jabang. 

About 1 8 miles due east of Boro-Budur is a temple known 
as Chandi Jabang (Plate LI I.) the plan of which is circular, with 
rectangular projecting bays facing the cardinal points, and 
raised on a lofty substructure consisting of a double podium, 
square on plan, with projections in the centre of each face. 
Above the cell were probably five storey§, of which parts of thd 
two lower ones only remain. In front of each bay are project- 
ing doorways enriched with sculpture and surmount^ by a 
huge gorgon mask. The lower podium is richly carved, with a 
running frieze representing lions with serpent’s tails along the 
upper part of the plinth. The entrance doorway faced west 
and was approached by an extremely steep flieht of steps, now 
much ruined. The metging of the upper circular portion of the 
structure into the lower rectangular substructure is a remark- 
ably fine piece of design which, omitting the gorgon masks, 
might pass as a classical conception of exceptional quality. 

FrambAnan. 

South of Chandi Jabang, and about 24 miles south-east of 
Boro-Budur, is a group of temples marking the old Hindi! 
capital of the island which are almost as interesting as that 
great temple itself. The more important of these have ail been 
measured in the last few years, and their plans and elevations 
illustrated, with conjectural restorations in some cases, and 
numerous photographs. The most important group seems to 
be that of Loro Jonggrang, close to Pramb&nan (the ancient 
Mendai^ Kamfilan), which consisted of a central enclosure, 
about 360 ft. square with six temples in two rows, the central 
temple in the rear being much larger than the other five. 
There is also an outer enclosure about 720 ft. square and 
between the two, but in close proximity to the central enclosure, 
156 small temples or cells in three rows round the same. The 
principal* temple measures 41 ft. square with projecting^ bays on 

> Yule, in ‘ Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal,’ toI. xxxr. p, 3. 



434 


FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


each side, three of which are subsidiary cells and the fourth an 
entrance porch to the central cell, the whole being raised on 
a podium about 4 ft. high with terrace round and projecting 
bays following the cruciform plan of the temple and approached 
by flights of steps in the centre of each side. The sides of the 
pMium are enriched with fine figure sculpture, as also the plinth, 
of the temple, the upper portion of which above the lintel of 
ftie chief doorway is gone. The five other temples, though 
smaller, are of similar design, and they would all have seemed 
at one time to have had statues in them representing Brahmi, 
Vishnu, S'iva, and others, two of them, Siirya and Chandra, 
being raised on bases carried by bulls. Midway between the 
two outer temples are what would seem to be tanks, cruciform 
on plan, consisting of parapets about 3 ft. high, which are 
sculptured on the inside. The 156 temples in the outer 
enclosure are all similar in design, consisting of a square cell 
with porch always facing outwards. The whole group may be 
of the age of Deva Kasfima, or the beginning of the loth 
century, and are possibly not the earliest Hindfi temples here. 

The most' important example of the Pramb&nan temples 
is that situated about one*third of a. mile north of Loro 
Jonggrang, and known as the Chandi Sewu or "thousand 
temples,” which is, or was when complete, only second to Boro- 
Budur in. interest The general character of Chandi Sewu will 
be understood from the plan (Woodcut No. 483), which shows 
it to have consisted of a central temple of large size surrounded 
by a great number of small detached cells, each of which con* 
tained statues, of which twenty-two remain still in situ} The 
central cell of the temple measures 45 ft. square, and with the 
four attached cells, one of which served as the entrance porch 
to the central cella, it formed a cross 85 ft. each way, the whole 
being raised on a richly ornamented square podium or base. 
This building is richly and elaborately ornamented with carving, 
but with a singular absence of figure-sculpture, which renders 
its dedication not easy to be made out ; but the most remark- 
able feature of the whole group is the multitude of smaller 
temples which surround the central one, 240 in number. 
Immediately outside the square terrace which supports the 
central temple stand twenty-eight of these — a square of eight 
on each side, counting the angular ones both ways. Beyond 
these, at a distance of 35 ft., is the second square, forty-four in 
number; between this and the next row are wide spaces of 
72 ft. on the east and west and 102 ft on the north and south 
sides. The two outer rows of temples are situated close to 


^ Shown on the plan by black dots. 



Chap. IV. 


PRAMBANAN. 


435 


one another, back to back, they are i68 in number, and form 
a rectangle measuring 525 ft by 467 ft All these 340 temples 
are similar to one another, about 12 ft square at the base, and 
22 ft. high, all richly carved and ornamented, and in every 
one is a small square cell, in which was originally placed a 
cross-legged figure. 

When looked a little closely into, it is evident that the 


Q Q QQ 
« QOn 

a B 
«i a 

g B 
g B 
g ft 
g B 
g B 
g B 
>a B 
'OB 
g B 
g B 
g B 
g B 
g B 
g B 
g B 
g B 

adflO 
0 tl 0 a 


nn B pq n n 0 


tltl dd ti ti 
a 

d d d d 
a 



dddddddd 


d d d d 
P P P P 


« I 


Lt i. 1 I i t.X.l 4.1 I I I I ■ ■ 1 

W so 0 100 200 300 400 600 

483. Plan of the Chandi Sewn, PramMnan. Scale 150 ft. to x in. 

Chandi Sewu is neither more nor less than Boro-Budur taken 
to pieces, and spread out, with such modifications as were 
necessary to adapt it to the position. 

Instead of a central d&gaba, with its seventy-two subordinate 
ones, and its five procession-paths, with their 436 niches con- 
taining figures of Buddha, we have here a central cell, with 
entrance porch and three subordinate ones, each containing no 
doubt similar images, and surrounding these, 240 cells contain- 
ing images arranged in four rows, with paths between, but not 





FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


joined together with sculpture-bearing screens, as in the earlier 
examples, nor joined side by side with the sculpture on thdr 
fronts, or inside, as was invariably the case in similar temples 
in Gujarftt of the same age. 

Sir Stamford Raffles gives A.D. 1098 for the completion of 
this temple, which, from the internal evidence, I fancy cannot 
be far m>m the truth. It would, however, be extremely 
interesting, if it could be fixed with certainty, as these Javan 
monuments will probably be found to be the only means we 
have of bridging over the dark ages in India. 

Meanwhile in the last ten years other examples in the 
district have been measured and illustrated. Midway between 

B IKI iBi m ‘s a 

|[J I^V ini smaller group, Chandi Lumbang 

iaal leal Isal Isii (Woodcut No. 484), with a central 

t 1^— temple surrounded by sixteen 

Ifj cells, each of which is supposed 
to have contained an image — 
JHl l==t Buddha-^r 5 iva, according to 
1^9 the dedication of the central cell. 
THr Three quarters of a mile 

■Bra east of Chandi Sewu is another 
I^Jl remarkable temple known as 
Chandi Plaosan, which consists 

B W IPV (pV ffif] enclosures side by side, 

IJI mi |U| 191 measuring 328 ft. deep, from 
484. Chftndi Lunbftnflr. ncftr PrunbSiuiii. back to front. In the centre 
(From kDrsi^gi^he India Office.) enclosure are two Smaller ones 
** ^ with a triple cell temple in each, 

62 ft. wide by 36 ft. deep, with central porch facing east, project- 
ing. 13 ft. and surroundM with a triple row of 180 cells, the two 
outer rows circular on plan, the inner row and those at the angles 
being square; This central enclosure measures 450 ft. wide. 
The second enclosure on the left (south side) is 200 ft. wide, 
with sixty-eight cells, all circular on plan, triple rows back and 
front, and single rows on the sides ; in the centre is a platform, 
68 ft. square, with traces of a portico or verandah round. 
Nothing has been found in the third enclosure on the north or 
right hand side, but in the one beyond is a square platform in 
centre, witii triple row of forty-eight circular cells at the back 
and sides and a double row of sixteen square cells in front In 
the temple are many fine statues of Dhyfini Buddhas in almost 
perfect preservation, eight of which are published in Ijzerman's 
work already referred ta^ 

* * JBetehrijving d«r Ondheden nsbij de SoenkwH en Djogdjaliuta,' pp. 93-107, 
■tad platM G.-K. 


o II Q Q a 

484. Chandi Lumbang, near Prambftnan. 
(From a Drawing at the India Office.) 
No scale. 



Chap. IV. 


PRAMBANAN. 


437 


Another triple cell structure about a mile south>west of 
Pramb&nan is that of Chandi Sari, which from its design and 
decoration Sir T. Stamford 
Raffles conceived to he a palace ; 
other writers consider it to have 
been the monastery of a temple 
half a mile soutl^ known as 
Chandi Kali - Bening, near 
Kalasan. Either way, as will 
be seen from' the illustrations 
(Plate LIII. and Woodcut No. 

485), it is a very remarkable 
building of two storeys and 
an attic The timber floors 
were carried on the stone 
corbelling, shown in section, 
being reached probably by 
wooden staircases now gone 
The most interesting portion 
in the elevation is the attic 
storey with the dormer win- 
dows, the earliest examples of 
that feature The structure 
measures 54 ft. frontage by 31 
ft. deep; the ground storey 
was about 12 ft. 6 in. high and 
the upper storey 9 ft, the 
whole Ixing raised on a base- 
ment 7 ft. 7 in. high, the total 
height to the top of the original 
stone roof being about 40 ft. 

There were two windows on 
each storey of the side eleva- 
tion, the examples in the rear 
being deep sunk niches only, Plan and section of Chandi Smi. 

and three dormers and on the 

back or west front : the windows of the ground storey were all 
closed with solid masonry. 

As it has retained its stone roof with sufficient remains of 
its rich decoration to allow of the conjectural restpration in 
Ijzerman’s work, Chandi Kali-Bening is probably the best pre- 
served temple in J4va. Its plan is cruciform- like those of 
Loro Jonggrang and Sewu, with central cell and ^rch and 
three other ce&, the entrance width each way being 66 ft. 
The height to the top of the principal cornice which runs at 
the same level round porch, central square, and side cells is 33 ft.. 




43S FURTHER INDIA. BookVIU. 

including a plinth 6 ft. high. It is surmounted by three storeys 
set back one behind the other, the lower one 1 1 ft. 5 in., the 



next 14 ft. 9 in., and the upper one 13 ft, these were probably 
crowned with a dSgaba about 22 ft. high, giving a total height 
of about 72 ft. The general design of the lower portion of the 
building is shown in the illustration of the porch (Plate LIV.), 
the upper storeys were decorated with rich canopied niches, 
each containing a statue of Buddha like those flanking the 
central doorway, with twenty-four miniature ddgabas surmount- 
ing the first storey, sixteen the second storey and eight the third 
storey, and these grouped round the great central d&gaba must 
have produced an exceptional effect. The gorgon head over 
the side doorways is shown in Woodcut No. 486. 

About 150 yards south of Kali-Bening Sir T. Stamford 
Raffles came across the remains of an ancient building, of which 
he gives the plan ; it consisted of a central hall surrounded by a 
portico or verandah, the whole carried by thirty-six square 


Chap. IV. 


SUKU. 


439 


piers of the same size.' The extreme dimensions were 73 ft. 
east and west by 53 ft. north and south, and it was rai^ on a 
platform with three steps. Sir T. Stamford Raffles came to 
the conclusion that this building might have been a Hall of 
State, in which case it is almost the only example of a secular 
building of which the plan still remains. 

SUKU. 

At a place called Suku, not far from Mount Lawu, near the 
centre of the Island, there is a group of temples, which, when 
properly illustrated, promises to be of great importance to the 
history of architecture in J&va.^ They are among the most 
modern examples of the style, having dates upon them of A.D. 
1435 and A.D. 1440, ‘ or less than forty years before the destruc- 
tion of Majapahit and the abolition of the Hindi! religion of 
JSva. So far as can be made out, they are coarser and more 
vulgar in execution than any of those hitherto described, and 
belonged to a degraded form of the Vaishnava religion. Garuda 
is the most prominent figure among the sculptures ; but there 
is also the tortoise, the boar, and other figures that belong to 
that religion. 

The principal temple, of which an illustration is given 
in Sir T. Stamford Raffles’ work,’ consists of a truncated 
pyramid raised on the top of three successive terraces. Its 
base is 43 ft. 6 in. square which, as it rises, decreases in size to 
about 22 ft., and it is constructed of horizontal stone courses 
forming steps to the height of 19 ft. ; on the top is a boldly 
moulded podium or platform 4 ft. 9 in. high, with a projecting 
wing in the centre on the western side, in front of which is a 
narrow flight of steps down the side of the pyramid enclosed 
between stone curbs. On the top of the wing are two serpents, 
but otherwise the whole building is plain and unornamented 
with sacred emblems. 

The most interesting feature connected with the remains at 
Suku, is their extraordinary likeness to the contemporary 
edifices in Yucatan and Mexico. It may be only accidental, 
but it is unmistakable. No one, probably, who is at all familiar 
with the remains found in the two provinces, can fail to observe 
it, though no one has yet suggested any hypothesis to account 
for it. When we look at the vast expanse of ocean that 
stretches between J&va and Central America, it seems impossible 
to conceive that any migration can have taken place eastward— 

' Sir S. Rattles* * History of Java/ plates 31 and 61, vol ii. pp« 49 it 

* Crawfurd, *DipL Indian Archipelago,’ 

* ‘ History of Java,’ Plate XXXf. 



440 


FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


say after the loth centut^ — ^that could have influenced the arts 
of the Americans; or, if it had taken place, that the Javans 
would not have taught them the use of alphabetical writing, 
and of many arts they cultivated, but of which the Americans 
were ignorant when discovered by the Spaniards. It seems 
equally improbable or impossible that any colonists from America 
could have planted themselves in J&va so as to influence the 
arts of the people. But there is a third supposition that may 
be possible, and, if so, may account for the observed facts. It 
is possible that the buildir^ races of Central America were of the 
same family as the native inhabitants of J&va. Many circum- 
.stances lead to the belief that the inhabitants of Easter Island 
belong to the same stock, and, if this is so, it is evident that 
distance is no bar to the connection. If this hypothesis may be 
admitted, the history of the connection would be this: — The 
Javans were first taught to build monumental edifices by 
immigrants from India, and we know that their first were their 
finest, and also the most purely Indian. During the next five 
centuries (A.D. 650-1150) we can watch the Indian influence 
dying out; and during the next three {A.D. 1150- 1450) a native 
local style developing itself, which resulted at last in the quasi- 
American examples at Suku. It may have been that it was 
the blood and the old faith and feelings of these two long 
dissevered branches of one original race that came again to the 
surface, and produced like effects in far distant lands. If this or 
something like it were not the cause of the similarity, it must 
have been accidental, and, if so, is almost the only instance of 
its class known to exist anywhere ; and, strangely enough, the 
only other example that occurs is in respect to the likeness that 
is unmistakable between certain Peruvian buildings and the 
. Pelasgic remains of Italy and Greece. These, however, are even 
more remote in date and locality, so the subject must remain 
in its present uncertainty till some ftesh discovery throws new 
light upon it 

Passing now towards the east end of the island beyond 
Kediri : in the neighbourhood of Melang, are three or four temples, 
two of which, Chandi Jago near Tumpang and Chandi Singa- 
sari are well illustrated in the Dutch survey. The plans of the 
platforms of these temples differ from those in the centre of 
the island; the staircases leading to the platforms are at 
one end only. In the case of Chandi Jago (Woodcut No. 487), 
at the west end are two flights between stone curbs on ea^ 
side of a portion of the lower platform which projects 8 ft. in 
front of the main platform, and is 17 ft. wide. There is a similar 
projection to the second platfonn, 7 ft. wide and 4 ft. deep, with a 



Chap. IV. 


CHANDI SINGASARI. 


441 


flight of steps on each side leading to the same, and the steps 
to the third platform are at right angles to the same, which has 
also a projecting bay 3 ft. wide and 2 ft deep. In order to allow 
of these approaches, the temple 
is set back in the rear instead 
of forming the central feature 
of the platforms; its plan is 
cruciform, 17 ft square with 
a cell 10 ft square, with an 
entrance porch on the west side 
and sunk niches only on the 
three other sides. The upper 
part of the temple has fallen 
in, but judging by another better 
preserved though smaller temple 
close by, the Chandi Kidal, it 
was surmounted by five storeys 
set back one behind the other, 
giving probably a total height 
of about 80 ft, the actual height 
of the remains to the top of 
the doorway being 66 ft. 6 in. 

The sides of the platforms are 
decorated with carved ornament 
of a decadent character, the 
figure sculpture being clumsy 
and poor. 

Chandi Kidal was raised on 
a single platform only, and with 
the. exception of the immense gorgon head above the doorway 
was not enriched with sculpture. The height was probably 
about 40 ft., and from what remains of the upper storeys their 
decoration consisted of niches with figures of Bodhisattwas in 
them similar to those of Chandi Bhima on the Dieng Plateau. 
The second temple Chandi Singasari is situated about 10 miles 
to the north-west of Tumpang. The temple is 26 ft. 6 in. square 
on plan, with a projecting p>orch on each face, three of them 
giving access to small cells 5 ft 4 in. square, and the fourth 
facing the west to a vestibule preceding the central cell, which 
is 10 ft. 8 in. square. So far it is similar to the examples at 
Pramb&nan ; over the four porches, however, according to Dr. 
Brandes’ conjectural restoration, were towers consisting of three 
storeys with square moulded balusters, five on each face, catpr- 
ing the storey above; each baluster hu three projecting 
mouldings, which diminish in width as it rises, and the storeys 
are slightly set back one behind the other. These towers rise 



44 * 


FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


30 ft. high above the platform, the central tower over the cell is 
50 ft. high, with triple storey and balusters, like those on the 
porches, but of increased dimensions, and all the vertical plane 
surfaces are elaborately carved with griffons, birds and foli^e, 
triangular vertical pendants between the balusters and ante* 
fixae at the angles with sculpture somewhat Greek in character. 
The crowning feature of all these towers resembles that which 
forms the summit of the illustration in Plate LVII. Fig. i, at 
Blitar. The structure itself would seem to have been erected as 
a memorial of some kind as with two others of different design, 
but all placed side by side it is raised on a platform about 3 ft. 
high with a flight of steps in front. What is remarkable in this 
illustration is the almost entire absence of any carved mouldings 
— a series of square fillets receding or projecting constitutes the 
leading characteristic of its design. The platform on which 
the temple at Singasari rests is 5 ft. 6 in. high, and 43 ft. 6 in. 
square, and on the western side is an additional platform like 
those at Chandi Jago 13 ft. wide and projecting 16 ft. 8 in. The 
two flights of steps to the platform rise on each side between the 
two platforms. With the exception of the gorgon heads on the 
doorway of each porch there is no other sculpture. 

Returning now westward, about 6 miles east of Kediri, 
according to Sir T. Stamford Raffles, is a solid massive 
structure at Sentul, without any internal chamber, affording on 
its summit an extensive platform with steps of ascent on the 
west side, the sides and the curb walls of the steps being 
enriched with sculpture. Eight miles south-west of Sentul is 
Chandi Frudung, constructed entirely in brick, but with a plan 
similar to the temples already described at Prambfinan and 
Singasari, viz,, with central cell and porch and three other 
cells. 

The^nost remarkable temples in the vicinity of Kediri are the 
two examples at Panataran, of which the annexed views (Plates 
LV. and LVI.) illustrate the most important. From the plan. 
Woodcut No, 488, and the views, it will be seen that it is virtually 
a three-storeyed pyramid, with flat platform at the top. The 
lower platform is 80 ft. square, with bastions on each side 35 ft. 
wide, one on the front or western face projecting 25 ft, and the 
other three 10 ft, only. On each side of the western projection 
is a flight of fourteen steps leading up to the first platform ; 
the second platform is 65 ft. .square, with three recesses instead 
of projections, and on the western side a central , flight of ten 
steps leading to the second platform, and in continuation from 
steps rising to the upper platform, which is 34 ft. 6 in. square. 
The podium of the lower platform is ornamented with numerous 
bas-reliefs on panels, representing subject.s, taken principally 



Chap. IV. 


PANATARAN. 


443 


from the R&m&yana, hut many also from local l^nds. Each 
of these is separated from that next it, by a panel, Mrith a circular 
medallion, containing a conventional animal, or a foliaged 
ornament The bas-reliefs of 
the second storey are better 
executed, and, from their 
extent, more interesting; their 
subjects, however, seem to be 
all taken from local legends 
not yet identified. The third 
is ornamented by panels, with 
winged figures, griffons, Gam- 
das, and flying monsters, more 
spirited and better executed 
than any similar figures are 
in any examples of Hindu 
art I am acquainted with. 

In the centre of the upper 
platform, but not shown on 
the plan, is a well hole which 
may have served in the 
temples at PrambSnan for the 488. Cbandi Panataran, plan of terraces, 
deposit of relics or of the 

ashes of deceased priests. This has been dug out and increased 
in dimensions below by treasure seekers. Whether at any time 
over this upper platform there was a superstructure of any kind 
is not known ; Sir Stamford Raffles speaks of the remains of 
various foundations. On these wood columns might have rested 
carrying a roof, but in any case the opening was probably closed 
over, and formed a secret chamber, on which may have been 
erected an altar. The sculptured panels of the lower platform 
are largely illustrated in the Dutch survey, and are inferior to those 
of Boro-Budur ; the bas-reliefs of the second platform seem to 
be of finer execution, judging by Kinsbergen’s photographs, but 
there are no illustrations given of them or of the winged figures 
and Garudas which decorate the podium of the upper platform, 
or of the remarkable cresting round, which seems to have served 
the purpose of a balustrade. 

There is a second temple at Panataran, which might from 
its decoration be called a serpent temple. The Batavian Society 
have devoted twenty-two photographs to the illustration of its 
sculptures, but have given no plan and no description. There 
is not even a general view from which its outline might be 
gathered, and no figure is introduced from which a scale might 
be guessed. Its date appears to be probably previous to A.D. 
1416. The figures, however, from which this is inferred are 




444 


FURTHER INDIA. 


Book VIII. 


not on the temple itself, but on a bath or tank attached to it, 
though, from the character of its sculptures, it is probably 
coeval.’ 

The reason why it is called a Serpent temple is, that the 
whole of the basement-moulding is made up of eight great 
serpents, two on each face, whose upraised heads in the centre 
form the side pieces of the steps that lead up to the central 
building (Plate LVI., Fig. 2), whatever that was. These serpents 
are not, however, our familiar seven-headed Nigas that we meet 
with everywhere in India and Cambodia, but more like the 
fierce crested serpents of Central America. The seven-headed 
serpent does occur very frequently among the sculptures at Boro- 
Budur — never independently, however, nor as an object to be 
worshipped, but as adorning the heads of a N&ga people who 
come to worship Buddha or to take a part in the various scenes 
represented there. Even then they are very unlike the Indian 
N&ga, whose hood is unmistakably that of an expanded cobra. 
Those at Boro-Budur and Panataran are crested snakes, like 
that represented in the Japanese woodcut in ‘Tree and Serpent 
Worship,’ page 56. 

The sculptures on these monuments are not all of a religious 
or mythological character, but either historical or domestic. 
What they represent may easily be ascertained, for above each 
scene is a short descriptive inscription, quite perfect, and in a 
character so modern that I fancy any scholar on the spot might 
easily read them. 

Meanwhile it is curious to observe that we know of only two 
monuments in our whole history which are so treated, and these 
the earliest and the last of the great school ; that at Bharaut, so 
often alluded to above, erected two centuries before Christ ; and 
this one attributed to the 14th century, while the struggle with 
thie Muhamniadan religion was gathering around it that strength 
which, within half a century from that time, finally extinguished 
the religion to which it belonged. 

There is one other temple of this class, at a place called 
Machanpontih, described by Herr Brumund as partly of brick, 
partly of stone, but singularly rich in ornamentation. “The 
sub-basement,” he says, “is composed of a tortoise and two 
serpents ^ the heads of these three animals unite on the ivest 
face and form the entrance.”^ 

The above is, it must be confessed, only a meagre outline of 
what might be made one of the most interesting and important 

^ There are other inscriptions about I * Archrvologisch Onderzoek,' Bd. ii. 
this teMple dated in a.d. 1197, 13)9, | p. 14.* 

W7< i3^» *373 and 1434,— ‘Die I - ‘ Koio Bocdoer,’ p. 433, 
Volkentooncelen van Panataran' in i' 



Chap. IV. 


ARCHITECTURE OF JAVA 


445 


chapters in the History of Indian Architecture. To do it justice, 
however, it would require at least lOO illustrations and 200 pages 
of text, which would swell this work beyond the dimensions 
within which it seems at present expedient to restrict it. We 
know all we want, or are ever likely to know, about Boro* 
Budur and one or two other monuments, but with regard to 
many of the others our information is as yet fragmentary, 
and in respect to some, deficient. Any qualified person might, 
by a six months’ tour in the island, so co-ordinate all this as to 
supply the deficiencies to such an extent as to be able to write a 
full and satisfactory History of Architecture in Jdva. The 
Dutch have, however, far outstripped our colonial authorities, 
not only in the care of their monuments, but in the extent to 
which they have published them, and in late years many works 
have appeared which are filling up the gaps, so much so that 
the survey sketched out by Sir Stamford Raffles is now being 
accomplished ; the appointment, also, in 1901 of an Archaeo- 
logical Survey under the direction of a highly qualified com- 
mission of experts, is at present advancing our information 
in every direction by publications that are models of exhaustive 
and accurate surveys. 



BOOK IX. 


CHINA AND JAPAN. 

CHAPTER I. 

CHINA. 

introductOrV. 


• CHRONOLOGY. 


Period of . 0.0.2205-1766 

Wu Wong period of Chcu or 

Chflw 1122-256 

Confiicius died 477 

Chi-hoang’li built Great Wall 

about 240 

Si- Hftn dynasty .201 (or 2 o 6 )-a.d. 9 

Ho-ti, seventeenth king ; Buddh- 
ism Introduced * ir, a. d. 90 

Si-Tsin d}Tiasty . 265-316 

Wu-t&i dynasty ; China divided 

into two kingdoms 4 <9 


Nan-pe-chao dynasties; China 
divided into two kingdoms, cir, A.D.439 
China reunited, capital Honan 589 or 551 
Th&ne dynasty 618-907 

Wu-tai dynasties . 907-960 

Pe-sung dynasty .9^-1127 

Northern China captured by 
Mongols . 1234 

Kublai Kbdn, Vuen dynasty 281 

Ming dynasty; Mongol expelled 7368 
Ta-t’ing or Manchu Tartar 

dynasty ; now on the throne 1644 


One of the great difficulties experienced in any description 
of Chinese architecture is the absence of plans of either 
temples, palaces, monasteries or dwellings. Within the last 
few years the photographic camera has lent its aid in the 
illustration of the great ■ palaces at Pekin within the walls of 
the Forbidden City, and of the Imperial Temples north of 
the •city, and an elatorate work has been published with over 
one hundred photographs taken after the sic^e,^ accompanied 
by a short description, giving only the names of the buildings, 
and without a single plan or diagram to show their juxta- 
position. In some cases views of the interior only are given 


* K. Ogawai. ‘ Photografdis of the (Mtloce buildings in Pekin. 



Chap. I. 


INTRODUCTORY. 


447 


which might have been of service if we were dealing with 
buildings erected by any of the European races, but. in China 
where the constructional arrangements are often of a very 
complicated nature which do not seem to have been r^ulated 
by natural laws, to evolve a plan from them is an almost 
impossible task. This is especially the case in the two most 
imf^rtant circular buildings, viz.: the Temple of Heaven (the 
Ch’i>nien-tien Hall Heaven palace) and the Temple of the Year 
Star (Huang*Chiang-yen), in both of which the attempt to 
construct a circular domed building with materials which lend 
themselves only to rectangular structures has resulted in make- 
shifts of a very peculiar nature. 

The earliest authority on the subject of Chinese architecture 
was Sir W. Chambers, but the illustrations in his book,^ probably 
executed by an artist who had never been in China, fail to 
conv^ a true conception of the buildings now better known from 
photographs such as those published bpr M. Ogawa. Further 
information is given in M. E. Fonssagnves’ work on the Ts’ing 
tombs in Si-ling,* in single chapters devoted to the subject 
by Sir R. K. Douglas,* M. Paleologue* and Dr. S. J. Bushell,* 
in an essay on Chinese architecture by Mr. E. Ashworth,' 
and from papers communicated to learned societies such as 
those of J. Lamprey,^ W. Simpson,' and F. M. Grattan.* The 
general conclusion, however, come to after consulting the above 
works and those by other writers on the subject is that the 
buildings are not such as we might expect to find among a 
people whose history and whose civilisation seems so exact a 
counterpart of that of Egypt. In both countries we have the 
same long succession of dynasties with dates, extending through 
3000 or 4000 years, interrupted only by shepherd invasions 
which in both countries lasted about five centuries, when the 
words of Manetho are as literally applicable to the Taeping 
rebellion as they are to the overthrow of the Hyksos by the 
uprising of the native Egyptian races. During all this long 
period the same patriarchal form of government prevailed in 
both countries — ^the king being not only the head of the secular 
government, but the chief priest of the people. Both people 


1 * Designs of Chinese Buildings/ 
eic. 1757 ‘ . 

* Si-ling : Etude sur les tombeaux de 
I’ouest de la dyiiastie des Ts'inf, par 
E. Fonsiigrives. — 'Annales du' Mus^ 
Guimet* ' 1907. 

’ ' ^iety in China.* 1894. 

* ‘ L’art Chinoia.’ 1887. 

* 'Chinese Art* 1904- 

* 'Detached Essays of the Archi- 


tectural Publication Society.* 1853. 

7 ' Chinese Architecture/ in ' R.I.B.A. 
Transactions/ vbl. xviL (1866-67) PP* 
157-178. 

* 'The Architecture of China/ in 
'R.I.B.A. Transactions/ vol. xxiv. 
(1873-74) PP. 33 -SO. 

* 'Chinese Architectare/ in 'R.I.B.A. 
Journal/ 3rd Series, vol. iL (1896) pp. 

37-64. 



448 


CHINESE ARCHITECTURE. 


Book IX. 


early attained a certain stage of civilisation, and maintained 
it without change or progress during the whole period of their 
existence. The syllabic symbols of the Chinese are the exact 
counterpart of the hieroglyphic writing of the Egyptians, as 
clumsy and as unlike that of any other contemporary nation, 
and as symbolic of their exclusive segregation from the rest of 
mankind. In both countries there was always the same calm 
contemplation of death, the same desire for an honourable 
funeral and a splendid tomb, and the same reverence for the 
dead. In these and fifty other particulars, the manners and 
customs of the two peoples seem identical, and the perfect 
parallelism only breaks down when we come to speak of their 
buildings. There are no tombs in China to be compared with 
the Pyramids, and no temples that approach those of Thebes 
in dimensions or in splendour. 

If the Chinese were as closely allied to the Tartar or 
Mongolian tribes on their north-eastern frontier as is generally 
supposed, this difference could hardly have existed. When the 
inner country has been more carefully examined, it is probable 
that we may- see cause to modify our opinion as to the archi- 
tectural character of the Chinese people. , 

This will be especially the case if, as is highly probable, the 
so-called Indo-Chinese inhabitants of Cambodia are very much 
more closely allied in blood tp the Chinese than they are to 
any of the' races inhabiting India; since by the erection of the 
buildings described in a previous division of this work, the 
Cambodians have nobly vindicated their title to be considered 
as one of the great building races of the world. Considering 
the short time of their existence, and the limited area they 
occimied, they may in fact lay claim to having surpassed even 
the Egyptians in this respect. 

' It will be strange if in Ho-nan and Kwang-si we do not 
eventually find the links which will confirm ^e connection of 
the two races of Cambodia and China, and explain what at 
present can only be regarded as one of the unsolved problems 
of architectural history. 

A little well-directed industry on the spot would very soon 
clear all this doubt away. Meanwhile there are other minor 
causes which may have contributed to the absence of monu- 
mental buildings in China, and which it may be as well to 
allude to before proceeding further. In the first place, the 
Chinese never had either . a dominant priesthood or ^ hereditary 
nobility. The absence of the former class is a very important 
cmisideration, because in all countries where architecture has 
be^p. carried to anything like ^rfection, it is to sacred art 
that it has owed its highest ins[Hration, and sacred art is never 



Chap. I. 


INTRODUCTORY. 


449 


so strongly developed as under the influence of a powerful and 
splendid hierarchy. Again^ religious and sectarian zeal is often 
a strong stimulus to sacred architecture, and this is entirdy 
wanting in this remarkable people. Though the Chinese are 
bigoted to a greater extent than we can well conceive in ail 
political matters, they are more tolerant than any other nation 
we know of in all that concerns religion. At the present 
moment three great religious sects divide the empire nearly 
equally between them. For though Buddhism is the nominal 
religion of the reigning family, and perhaps numbers more 
followers than either of the other two, still the followers of 
the doctrines of Confucius — the contemporary and rival of 
5&kya-Sinha — are a more purely Chinese sect than the other, 
and hold an equal place in public estimation; while, at the 
present time, the sect of Lao-tse, or the Doctors of Reason, 
is more fashionable, and certainly more progressive, than the 
others.^ Christianity too, might at one time have encroached- 
largely on either of these, and become a very prevalent religion 
in this tolerant empire, had the Jesuits and Dominicans under- 
stood that the condition of religious tolerance here is a total 
abstinence from interference in political matters. This, how- 
ever, the Roman Catholic priesthood never could be brought 
to understand ; hence their expulsion from the realm, and the 
former proscription of their faith which otherwise would not only 
have been tolerated like all others, but bid fair to find more 
extensive favour than any. Such toleration is highly laudable in 
one point of view ; but the want of fervour and energy from which 
it arises is fatal to any great exertions for the honour of religion. 

In the same manner the want of an hereditary nobility, and 
indeed of any strong family pride, is equally unfavouraUe to 
domestic architecture of a durable description. At a man’s 
death his property is generally divided equally among his 
children. Consequently the wealthiest men do not build 
residences calculated to last longer than their own lives. The 
royal palaces are merely somewhat larger and more splendid 
than those of the mandarins, but the same in character, and 
erected with the same ends. 

There is no country where property has hitherto been con- 
sidered so secure as China. Private feuds and private wars were 


^ The population of the Chinese 
empire is estimated at 400 millions of 
souls. If we estimate the Buddhists in 
China at 150 millions of souls and put 
down 50 millions for the Buddnbt 
population of Tibet, Manchuria, Burma, 
Siam, Cambodia, and Ceylon, we shall 


probably not err greatly on the side of 
under • estimating them, making 200 
millions the total number of followers 
of this religion in the whole world, or 
about one-eighth of the human race— • 
not the exaggerated numbers at which 
they are usually estimated. 



450 CHINESE ARCHITECTURE. Book IX. 

till lately unknown ; foreign invasion was practically impossible, 
and little dreaded. Hence they have none of those fortalices, 
or fortified mansions, which by their mass and solidity give 
such a marked character to a certain class of domestic edifices 
in the western world. Equality, peace, and toleration, are 
blessings whose value it would be difficult to over-estimate ; but 
on the dead though pleasing level where they exist, it is in 
vain to look for the rugged sublimity of the mountain, or the 
terrific grandeur of the storm. The Chinese have chosen the 
humbler path of life, and with singular success. There is not 
perhaps a more industrious or, till the late wars, happier 
people on the face of the globe; but they are at the same 
time singularly deficient in every element of greatness, either 
political or artistic. 

Notwithstanding all this, it certainly is curious to find the 
oldest civilised people now existing on the face of the , globe 
almost wholly without monuments to record the past, or any 
desire to convey to posterity a worthy idea of their present 
greatness. It is no less remarkable to find the most populous 
of nations, .a nation in which millions are always seeking 
employment, never thinking of any of these higher modes of 
expression which would serve as a* means of multiplying 
occupation, and which elevate while feeding the masses; and 
still more, startling to find wealth, such as the Chinese possess, 
never invested in self-glorification, by individuals erecting for 
themselves monuments which shall astonish their contempor- 
aries, and hand down their names to posterity. 

From these capses it may be that Chinese architecture has 
not attracted much attention. In one respect, however, it is 
instructive, since the Chinese are the only people who now 
emplw polychromy as an essential part of their architecture : 
indeed, with them, colour is far more essential than form ; and 
certainly the result is so far pleasing and satisfactory, that for 
the lower grades of art it is hardly doubtful that it should 
always be so. For the higher grades, however, it is hardly 
less certain that colour, though most valuable as an accessory, 
is incapable of that lofty power of expression which form 
conveys to the human mind. 



CHAPTER II. 


CONTENTS. 

The origin and development of the Chinese temple and other structures— 
The materials employed in their buildings. 


At one time it was thought that it might be possible with 
further information on the subject to describe the buildings 
appertaining to each of the religions, Confucian, Taoist, and 
Buddhist, to which they belonged, but externally the temples 
are nearly all of the same type, and it is only from their 
interior decoration and by the statues placed in them that anv 
distinction can be made. The Muhammadan mosques, which 
in other countries have always developed a type of their own, 
are in China — all in general form — identical with the Buddhist 
and other temples, and can only be distinguished their 
external decoration with texts from the Qordn, and are not 
even to be recognised by the minaret which in other'countries 
has been their chief characteristic feature. 

The same similarity in design and style of all the religious 
buildings obtains equally in their civil structures, there being 
no essential distinction between sacred and secular work, and 
the further we go back the closer the affinity they have to one 
another — the temple, the tomb and the dwelling being sym* 
bolically repetitions of each other. The general effect, in fact, 
of a Chinese city, as seen in a bird’s-eye view is one of extreme 
monotony in which every building seems to be covered with 
the same kind of roof, differing only in dimensions, and in some 
cases with a more elaborate decoration — and this applies not 
only to the Forbidden City in Pekin, where the buildings are 
mainly peaces or public monuments, but to any other city of 
importance: this arises from the circumstance that the pre- 
vailing ordinary type of Chinese architecture is that known as 
the Ting^ which consists of a roof of concave section carried on 
short columns. If the roof is of great dimensions and elabor- 
ately decorated, it covers either a temple, an Imperial hall of 
audience, or the official residence of a mandarin, if of small size 
and light construction, it is that of a house ; this almost universal 



45 * 


CHINESE ARCHITECTURE. 


Book IX. 


concave form of roof, as generally referred to by writers on 
the subject as a reminiscence of the tent of the Tartars, who 
are supposed to have introduced it. The authors of this theory, 
however, forgot that the Chinese have been longer out of tents, 
and know less of them, than any other people now on the face 
of the globe. The Tartar conquest, like our Norman one, has 
long t^n a fusion rather than a subjection, and does not 
seem to have produced any visible effect on the manners or 
customs of the original inhabitants of China. It may also be 
observed that the typical form of the roof of a Tartar tent was 
and is domical, like those represented in the Assyrian sculptures, 
and seldom, if ever, constructed with a hollow curve ; so that 
the argument tells the other way. Be this as it may, the form 
of roof in question arose from a constructive exigence, which 

others would do well 
to imitate. In a 
country like China, 
where very heavy 
rains fall at one sea- 
son of the year, tiled 
roofs, such as they 
almost universally 
use, require a high 
pitch to carry off the 
water ; but the glar- 
ing sunshine of 
another season ren- 
489. Diagram of Chinese Construction. derS shade tO walls 

and windows abso- 
lutely necessary. If (as on the left of the diagram No. 489) 
the slope of the roof is continued so far out as to be effective 
for the last purpose, the upper windows are too much darkened, 
and it is impossible to see out of them. To remedy this defect, 
the Chinese carry out their eaves almost horizontally from the 
face of the walls, where a leak becomes of slight importance ; 
and then, to break the awkward angle caused by the meeting 
of diese two slopes, they ease it off with a hollow curve which 
answers most effectually the double purpose of the roof. These 
proj^tin^ eaves have' the further advantage of protecting the 
widls which — constructed in tiihberonly — ^would decay rafridly if 
frequently deluged with rain. The protection given to the front 
and lUtCk walls of the house was equally required for the sides, 
sd. that. the' prbjecting eaves are carried round these; this, how- 
ev^, sdll left exposed the gable ends, in^ order ta' protect which 
% sUiaff pent robf of slight projection was' built in under the 
' gable. ' The only part df such a roof that admitted of decora- 




Chap. II. TEMPLES AND OTHER STRUCTURES. 


453 


tion was the central ridge, the hipped ridge create by the 
intersection of the main roof, and the projecting eaves at the 
sides, under these were added further developments in their 
origin of a constructional nature, but which, in course of time, 
became more or less purely decorative forms. The .illustration, 
Woodcut No. 490, which is based upon a drawing by a native 
artist, will explain the typical form of roof just described. In 
order to accentuate and give more importance to the roof, the 
ridge was raised much higher, and in some cases surmounted 



490. Chinese Roof, with Trimoya Gables. 


by vertical pierced terra - cotta slabs, which formed a lofty 
cresting, and the ends of the ridge were decorated with heads 
of dragons or fish. On each side of the main roof, but set 
back about a foot from the verge, a heavy rib of tiles was 
carried down the roof to about two or three feet below the hip, 
probably to weight the roof ; out of this rib the hip ridge grew, 
bqing turned up at the extreme angle. The tiles^ employ^^ to 
cover th^e roof were of two kinds : flat tiles with each side 
turned up, ahd covering tiles, the lower end^ of both beiryg 
stopped with some decorative device, constituting in the latter 
a kind of antefixa. 

The great projection of the eaves required, however, some 
added support with a light roof this could be obtained by & 
corbel bracket, such as is shown in Woodcut No. 489, cari;ying 
the plate which the rafters rest^. In roofs of greater rize 
an assemblage was required, consisting of two to five brackets, 


454 


CHINESE ARCHITECTURE. 


Book IX. 


one under the other; these brackets could only be attached 
properly to the columns carrying the roof (generally 6 ft. a|»rt, 
and sometimes more), so that additional brackets were required 
on each side to give further support to the horizontal beam or 
plated carrying the rafters. This led to a construction of which 
Woodcut No. 491 will give some better conception ; this illustra- 
tion is from the Temple at Nikkd in Japan, but as there is 
scarcely any pattern in the latter country which has not been 
borrowed from China it is equally representative of either. 
Another peculiarity which also g^ves a local character to all 
this architecture is the method of framing a roof so unlike that 
of other people. In early times, and in their domestic work 
down to the present day, the timl^ most available for this pur- 
pose was either 
the bambu or a 
spiall pine, which, 
like most endo- 
gens, is soft and 
spongy in the in- 
side, while the 
outer rings of 
wood are close- 
grained, hard, 
and strong: it is 
thus practically a 
hollow wooden 
cylinder, whioh, 
it squared to form 
a framing as we 
do, would fall to 
pieces; but merely 
cleaned and used whole, it is a very strong and durable building 
material, though one which requires ail a Chinaman’s ingenuity 
and neatness to frame together with sufficient rigidity for the 
purposes of a roof. 

The roof is usually constructed (as shown in Woodcut 
No. 489) by using three or four transverse pieces or tie-beams, 
one over the other, the ends of each beam bein^; supported on 
that below it by means of a framed piece of a different class of 
wood. By this method, though to us it may look unscientific, 
they make up a framing that resists the strongest winds un* 
injured. 

Of course the theory here put forward refers more particularly 
to houses in which the employment of bambu and the small 
(fine still obtains, but drawings in the National Library in Paris 
show that in the Sth and 4th century B.C., their temples and 




Chap. II. 


MATERIALS EMPLOYED. 


455 

Walls were constructed in the same way as at the present day, 
and that more than twenty centuries have passed without any 
material change in general design beyond that of the increas<^ 
size given to their structures and to the elaboration of Uie tiled 
roof with its ridges and hips. The consequent result was the 
demand for beams and columns of far greater dimensions and 
strength; so that at a very early period cedar* wood was 
imported from the southern provinces ; the framing of the roof 
still remained, however, of a most elementary character, in which 
there was no- attempt at trussing, and balks of timber of immense 
scantling were piled one on the other to an extent unknown in 
any other country; this necessitated — first, their support ly 
columns of great size, those in the Palace of Heaven being 4 ft. 
in diameter, and from 60 to yo ft. high, secondly, the employ- 
ment of brackets to lessen the bearing of the great beams, and 
thirdly — in order to cany the widely projecting eaves— the 
assemblage of a series of bracket corbellings, to which attention 
has been already drawn. In their treatment of columns and 
beams the Chinese method is difTerent from that of any other 
style ; there are no capitals to the columns, and the beams they 
carry at various heights are tenoned into the column, which is 
always carried up to the roof plate, and constitutes externally 
a visible part of the wall rising above the verandah roof. This 
singular arrangement arises from their system of building ; the 
main roof is always designed and framed first, and is then 
hoisted on to the columns, the position of which and of their 
stone foundations can only be determined after the framing of 
the roof is completed ; suraequently the verandah roofis framed 
and then raised on the smaller columns which constitute its 
enclosure. In order to light the interior of the temple or hall, 
the intervals between the columns rising above the verandah 
roof might have been filled with pierced screen work con- 
stituting a clerestory, but this is not in accordance with Chinese 
custom ; for although such screens would have received ample 
protection from the sun by the widely projecting eaves carried 
on brackets, this interval is always filled in with beams also 
tenoned into the columns, and generally brought out so as to be 
flush with the column face. A description has already been 
given of the roof in which the upper part of the gallery at each 
end rises above the lower part of the roof of less pitch, and 
which is known to the Chinese za Trimoya. This, however, is 
not universal, sometimes the roof is hipped in the usual way 
at each end, the section through the front and side being the 
same. The roof of the superstructure shown in Wo^cut 
No. 501 -is thus hipped, whilst on the other hand that of the 
Buddha hall in the Summer Palace, near Pekin (Woodcut 



4S6 CHINESE ARCHITECTURE. Book IX. 

Na 494) is of the Trimoya type» similar to that shown in 
Woodcut No. 49a 

Timber and brick are the chief materials employed in nearly 
all Chinese buildings, stone being employed only for the founda- 
tion piers on which the columns rest Brick walls are built in 
between the wooden columns — being carried up only to the 
first beams ; in other words they are employed only as a filling- 
in, and not as a support for the roof. Chinese pagodas, on the 
other hand, are built entirely in brick with occasionally, as in 
the porcelain pagoda at Nanking (now destroyed), a covering of 
porcelain tiles ; there are also two halls of Buddha, lofty two- 
stor^ buildings, which are built in brick with terra-cotta glazed 
plaques outside. The p'ailusy p'ai~fangs, or memorial gateways 
>»-the' analogues of the Indian Torattas-—vfhen built in stone are 
sometimes copies of wooden structures the beams of which are 
tenoned into the columns or piers ; in those of a more monu- 
mental character which form the chief entrance gateways to 
some of their temples — as in that erected to Confucius in Pekin 
(Woodcut No. 502), they are sometimes in marble with arched 
openings, showing that the Chinese were well acquainted with 
the principles of the arch and the vault There are also some 
examples known as beamless temples attributed to the tith 
century,^ which were roofed with barrel vaults, and probably 
served to 'store archives and relics on account of their incom- 
bustible nature. 

The walls which enclose their cities are built in brick, and 
their bridges in stone with marble casing and balustrades. 
The raised platforms for altars, some of their temples, and 
generally the Imperial Halls, are all built in marble ; otherwise 
dl Chinese omstructions are in timber, the roofe being covered 
. witii glazed tiles, yellow, if Imperial structures, and green, blue 
or purple for others ; the ridge and hip rolls with the dragons 
arm fishes which surmount their roofs are all in glazed terra- 
cotta. :*Great importance is attached to the orientation of 
temfdes, which as a rule face the south. This, however,, is 
determined by geomancers who have to take into account ^ 
configuration of the ground, magnetic currents, the proximity of 
springs^ and rising vapmirs in their vicinity ; to these infiuences 
is. given the title of Fong-sknU — memiing literally “ wind and 
water '’-~-und no structure of any kind, whether temple, ^lace, 
or bouse, is ever built unless in accordance with fongshuie^ ,. In 
order, to give more , impqrtance to the imperial , strncturos* 
wbe^ier temples or reception balb, they are raised on platforins 
with, triple terraces and balustrades round, and three fiigbtA of 


^ R.I.B. Ae >894'9j;, series, vol. ii. p. 45. 



Chap. II. 


MATERIALS EMPLOYED. 


4S7 


steps on the south front ; the flight in the middle is subdivided 
into three, the central portion forming an inclined slope which 
is covered with dragons and clouds in relief, in some cases the 
treads of the steps on each side are also carved with dragons in 
relief; the terraces, balustrades and steps being all in white 
marble. The same description applies to the north and south 
altars of the Temple of Heaven, and to those of the Temple of 
Agriculture. 




»ple of the Great Dragon. (From a Photograph by Beato.) 


CHAPTER III. 


CONTENTS. 

Temple of the Great Dragon— Buddhist Temples— Tombs — Pagodas- 
P'ai-lus — Domestic Architecture. 


Temple of the Great Dragon, Pekin. 

The most magnificent temple in the capital, so far as we know 
in the empire, is that known as the Temple of Heaven, or 
the Great Dragon. It is situated close to the southern wall 
of the city in a square enclosure measuring about a mile each 
way. From the outer gate a raised causeway leads to the 
temple, on either side of which, for the accommodation of 
the priests, are numerous buildings approached by frequeht 
flights of steps leading down to a park beautifully planted. 
In the central part of the enclosure are two altars, distin* 
guished as the North and South. The South altar consists 
of a circular platform of three concentric terraces, the upper 
one 90 ft. in diameter, the middle terrace 150 ft., and the 
lower one 210 ft., all enclosed with balustrades and raised 
about 6 ft. one above the other; these terraces are ascended 
by four flights of steps on the north, east, south and west 
sides respectively. In the centre of the platform are the five 
sacred vessels found in all Buddhist temples, over which a 
canopy is erected on the occasiqn of a celebration. The North 
altar is situated about 1500 ft. north of the South altar, difTer- 
ing from the latter only in the number of flights of steps, 
there being eight flights, three of which are placed side by 
side on the north end, the central portion of the middle flight 
forming a gradual slope and covered with dragons and clouds 
in relief. In the centre of the upper terrace is die circular 
structure known as the Ch’i-nien T’ien (Heaven’s Palace) shown 
in the woodcut No. 492, which has the appearance of a three- 
storeyed structure, but in reality consists of a central hall 
90 ft. in height with double aisles round, the roofs over which 
are shown in the woodcut The roof with its widely projecting 
eaves and the drum below are carried by four immense columns, 
4 ft. in diameter, the second roof and drum are carried' by twelve 



46 o 


CHINESE ARCHITECTURE. 


Book IX. 


columns, as also the lower stor^r. The construction inside is 
of a very extraordinary kind; at the level of the upper part 
of the second roof carved beams are tenoned into the four 
columns, over which, between each are provided two other 
columns, forming a sort of attic storey, to support the roof 
and the internal dome. Though not indicated in the woodcut, 
the four great columns, which rise to the roof, are visible out- 
side, between them and at the back of the attic columns the 
outer case of the drum is constructed with curved timbers, and 
there are no windows as shown. As the horizontal beams, or 

S lates, are only tenoned into the columns, and the weight they 
ave to carry is greater than such beams could carry, it 
has been found necessary to provide other beams underneath, 
on which they rest, and these beams are sunk into others 
crossing from the four great columns to four of those of the 
aisle or clerestory — an arrangement of a most complicated 
character. The interior of the dome is horizontally subdivided 
into three parts, the lower decorated with an assemblage 
of brackets forming a frieze, the middle part panelled and 
the centre sunk with a deep coffer ; all the woodwork is 
gilded, the upper part of the columns with patterns in imita- 
tion of damask work. The Temple of Heaven is said to -have 
been erected about the year 1420 A.D., and originally the 
roof of the upper storey was covered with blue tiles, that 
of the middle one with yellow tiles, and of the lower one 
green, but the Emperor Kien-lung (1736-1796) changed them 
all to one colour of a deep ultramarine blue. As this temple 
is said to have been burnt down in i860, it is probable that 
the existing building is only a copy. A second circular temple 
in the enclosure of the Temple of Heaven, the Huang-Chiang- 
yen, has one roof only, and the dome inside carried on eight 
columns is similarly decorated with two beaded friezes, and 
panelled above with a circular plaque in the centre. There 
is a third example of a circular dome in the Chung-ho-t’ien, 
the Hall of Central Peace, in which the dome is decorated 
in the same way, but is much finer in design and decoration 
than the other two, and a fourth in the Temple of Agriculture 
of which an excellent lithograph is published in vol. xvii. 
of the ‘R.I.B.A. Transactions, 1866-67.’ The bracket frieze 
found in these circular temples exists also in the rectangular 
ones ; in both cases their origin can be traced to the constructive 
forms evolved in the support of the widely projecting^ eaves, 
th^ are employed also in the deeply coffered ceilings of 
SOTO of the halls of the Impo’ial Palace, such as those of 
the Chio^tai Chung -cbing, and other halls of reception and 
audience. 



Chap. III. 


BUDDHIST TEMPLES. 


461 


With the exception of the examples just described, and 
a few others, all the temples in China, whether Cdnfucian, 
Taoist or Buddhist, are based on the T’ing type, differing only 
in their dimensions. Generally speaking, the temple of a 
Buddhist monastery is enclosed by a wall, with a monumental 
gateway or P’ai - lu at the entrance and a series of three 
detached buildings beyond, placed one behind the other, 
oil a central axis, with courts between, and communicating 
one with the other by means of covered corridors. The first 
building is the ex-voto hall with statues; the second, is the 
principal temple, in which are the three images of the Buddhist 
triad, and the altar with the sacred vessels in front ; the build- 
ing in the rear contains sometimes a miniature digaba in 
marble, in which are enclosed supposed relics of Buddha. 
To the right and left of the enclosure, and placed symmetrically, 
are other isolated structures, such as the bell-tower, the library, 
the pagoda, and the monks’ dwellings. 

Buddhist Temples. 

The only Buddhist temple in China of which any plans 
have been made, or which I have myself had an opportunity 
of inspecting, is that of Ho-nan, opposite Canton. Unfortun- 
ately it is comparatively modem, and by no means monumental. 
It is a parallelogram enclosed by a high wall, measuring 306 ft. 
by 174 ft. In the shorter front facing the river is a gateway 
of some pretension. This leads to a series of halls opening 
into each other, and occupying the whole of the longer axis 
of the internal court The first and second of these are porches 
or ante-chapels. The central one is the largest, and practically 
the choir of the building. It contains the altar, adorned by 
gilt images of the three precious Buddhas, with stalls for the 
monks and all arrangements necessary for the daily service. 
Behind this, in the next compaitment, is a d&gaba, and in its 
rear another apartment devoted to the goddess Kuan-yin, 
principally worshipped by women — in fact, the Lady Chapel 
of the church. Around the court are arranged the cells of the 
monks, their kitchen, refectory, and all the necessary offices 
of the monastery. These are generally placed against the 
outer wall, and open into the court 

At Pekin there are several lamasaries or Buddhist monas- 
teries, of a much more monumental character than that of 
Ho-nan, but it is very difficult indeed to guess at their 
arrangement from mere verbal descriptions without dimensions. 
The gateway of one, represented in Woodcut No. 493, gives 
a fair idea of the usual mode of constructing gateways in China. 



CHINESE ARCHITECTURE. Book IX. 

It has three openings of pleasing proportions, and is as 
well designed as any to be found in China. Behind it is to 
be seen the d&gaba, to which it leads: a tall form, with a 
reverse slope, and an exaggerated Htt, so altered from those 
we ate accustomed to in the earlier days of Indian architecture. 



493. Monumental Gateway of Buddhiit Monastery, Pekin. (FVom a Photograph 

by Beato.) 

that it requires . some familiarity with the intermediate forms 
in NepAl and Burma to feel sure that it is the direct lineal 
descendant of the topra at SiUidu or M&nikyftlft. The dUgaba 
is square on plan, with an octi^;onal minaret at each angl^ 


Chap. III. 


BUDDHIST TEMPLES. 


4 «S 

the central portion shown in the woodcut rests on a series of 
narrow steps, and an octagonal base with richly carved comice 
and plinth, and the representation of the birth of the Bodhisattva 
on the die. This d&gaba, all in white marble, was erected in 
1780 to the memory of the Teshu Lima Erdeni, who died in 
Pekin,* It is more or less a copy of a Thibetan Chorten, 
and was probably designed by an architect from that province. 



494. BaddUit temple in the Sammer Pilaee near Pdcin. (From ePbolocmphfagr Beale.) 


The usual form of temple as seen in the towns and villages 


* /inte, vol. i. p. 294. 




464 CHINESE ARCHITECTURE. Book IX. 

is very simple, rectangular on plan, with five bays in the front, 
which always faces the south ; and three at the side ; with a 
verandah and flight of steps in the centre of the south front 
leading to the central doorway. Exceptions to the ordinary 
type are found in two temples, one of which, T’siang Cha, 
the Buddhist temple of the sleeping Buddha in the Summer 
Palace near Pekin (Woodcut No. 494 and Plate LVIII.) is 
perhaps the finest architectural achievement in China. The 
building consists of two lofty storeys, built in brick and faced 
with glazed terra-cotta in bright colours, imitating the timber 
framed construction of the usual T'ing Temple. The spaces 
between the terra-cotta columns are decorated with an immense 
series of miniature niches, one above the other, and side by 
side, each occupied by a cross-legged figure of Buddha. This 
temple is erected on an eminence, forming a conspicuous 
feature in the landscape, and has perhaps the richest ridge 
cresting to be found in China; there are three finials in the 
centre, dragons at each end and others between; the roof 
belongs to the Trimoya type, and has heavy hip roils termin- 
ating in dragons. What is most unusual in this temple is 
the range of circular-headed windows to each floor (Woodcut 
No. 494); in the ordinary temple there are no clerestory 
windows, all the light to the interior is supplied through the 
doorway and the windows at the back of the verandah. This 
temple and a small bronze pagoda near it were the only 
buildings preserved in the Summer Palace on its destruction 
in i860, the former on account of its beauty, and the latter 
its indestructibility. There is a second Buddha’s hall near 
Pekin of the same type of design, with a double, eaves-course 
and balcony, which has destroyed its simplicity. In this latter, 
built in the Shao-hu-t’ien grounds, the circular columns and 
squared beams of its timber prototype have been reproduced 
in glazed terra-cotta, these features being purely decorative a.s 
they are carried on the brick wail below. 

Another type of temple, dating from the 15th century, and 
known as the Wut*a-Ssfi near Pekin, consists of a lofty square 
pedestal, which recalls the lower portion of the celebrated 
temple at Bodh-Gayfl (Woodcut No. 19). The pedestal is 
suMivided into five storeys by string-courses, each storey 
enriched with arcaded niches containing statues of Buddha, 
the whole crowned with five square d^abas, the centre one 
with thirteen projecting eaves, and the angle towers with eleven 
(MTojecting eaves like the Pa-li Chwang Pagoda (Plate LIX.), 
1 5 miles east of Pekin. 



Chap. III. 


TOMBS. 


4 *S 


Tombs. 

Like all people of Tutanian origin, one of the most remarks 
able characteristics of the Chinese is their reverence for the 
dead, or, as it is usually called, their ancestral worship. In 
consequence of this, their tombs are not onlv objects of care, 
but have frequently more ornament bestowed upon them 
graces the dwellings of the living. 

Their tombs are of different kinds ; often merely conical 




495. Chinese Grave. (From Fortune'.^ 'Wanderings in China.') 

mounds of earth, with a circle of stones round their base, like 
those of the Etruscans or ancient Greeks, as may be seen in 
Woodcut No 495, which would serve equally well for a restora* 
tion of those of Tarquinia or Vulci. 

A very common arrangement is that of a horseshoe-shaped 
platform, cut out 
of the side of a 
hill. It conse- 
quently has a high 
back, in which is 
the entrance to the 
tomb, and slopes 
off to nothing at 
the entrance to the 
horseshoe, where 
the wall generally 
terminates with 

two lions or dra- Chinese Tomb. (FWmi Fortune’s 'Wunderings in China.’) 

gons, or some fantastic ornament common to Chinese architecture. 




466 


CHINESE ARCHITECTURE. 


Book IX. 


When the tomb is situated, as is generally the case, on a hillside, 
this arrangement is not only appropriate, but eluant (Woodcut 
Na 496). When the same thing is imitated on a plain, it is 
singularly misplaced and unintelligible. Many of the tombs are 
built of granite, finely polished, and carved with a profusion 
of labour that makes us regret that the people who can employ 
the most durable materials with such facility should have so 
great a predilection for ephemeral wooden structures. 

When the rock is suitable for the purpose, which, however. 



seems to be rarely the 
case in China, their 
tombs are cut in the 
rock, as in Etruria and 
elsewhere; and tombs of 
the class just described 
seem to m a device for 
converting an ordinary 
hillside into a substitute 
for the more appropriate 
situation. 

, One of the finest ex- 
amples of the tumulus 
type is the tomb ofY ung- 
lo of the Ming dynasty 
near Pekin 1425 (AD.) 
(Woodcut No. 497) ; 
this consists of an earth 
mound about 650 ft. in 
diameter, with a retain- 
ing wall crenellated and 
about 20 ft. high round it. 
This is precMed by a 
square tower (E) in three 
stoieys, each set slightly 
behind the one beneath 
it ; in front of this is an 
enclosure 500 ft. wide 
and 1150 ft. long, with 
an entrance gateway (A) 
in front and subdivided 
by cross walls into two 
courts with a second 


497. Plan of the Tomb of Yung.lo. 


gateway (C) between 
them. In the further 


court is the altar (D), and in the first or principal court the |;reat 
Ancestral Hall (BX which is one of the finest examples of Chinese 



Chap. III. 


TOMBS 


4«r 


architecture. It belongs to the T’ing type already described, 
but is perhaps the largest example in China, being 220 ft in 
length and 92 ft deep. There are nine bays in front and 
five on the sides — ^the entrance is in the centre of the long 
front which faces the south, and there is no verandah. The 
hall in which the ancestral tablet of Yung-lo is placed, consists 
of nave and aisles of the same height and outer aisles all round 
roofed over at a lower level corresponding with that which in 
the temples forms a verandah, similar to that shown on plan in 
Woodcut No. 504 where, however, there are seventeen bays. 
The main roof is supported - by thirty-two columns, 37 in. in 
diameter and 36 ft. high, the panelled ceiling of both nave and 
aisles being at the same level. The twenty-eight columns carry- 
ing the verandah and chambers at the bactc are 21 ft. high. 



498, Group of Tombs near Pekin. (From a Photograph by Beato.) 


Like the Temple of Heaven it is raised on a platform, rect- 
angular in this case, with a triple terrace surmounted by marble 
balustrades and three flights of steps in front, the central flight 


468 


CHINESE ARCHITECTURE. 


Book IX. 


subdivided into three, of which the middle part has a gradual 
slope carved with dragons and clouds in relief. In the further 
comer is the great altar with the five sacred vessels. 

Occasionuly, however, the Chinese do erect tombs, which, 
though ornamental, are far from being in such good taste as the 
two forms just quoted. A tumulus is considered appropriate 
for this purpose all the world over, and so is the horseshoe form 
under the circumstances in which the Chinese employ it ; but 
what can be said in favour of such an array of objects as those 
shown in the preceding Woodcut No. 498? Judged by the 
standard of taste which prevails in China at the present day, 
th^ may be considered by the natives as both elegant and 
ornamental, but it would be difficult to conceive anything which 
spoke less of the sepulchre, even from a Chinaman’s point of 
view ; while, on the other hand, their dimensions are such as 
to deprive them of all dignity as architectural objects. 

T’ais or Pagodas. 

The objects of Chinese architecture with which the European 
eye is most familiar are the fats or pagodas. In the south 
they generally have nine storeys, but not always, and in the 
north they range from three to thirteen. It has usually been 
assumed that they owe their origin to the religion of Fo or 
Buddha, being nothing more than exaggerated d8gabas, but 
there are two ancient Chinese drawings in the National Library, 
Paris, reproduced in Paleologue> which represent the taas or fats 
of the Imperial Palace at Pekin, one of them shows a square 
tower in three storeys, each receding behind the other, so as to 
leave a terrace round and a pavilion, or shrine, at the top ; the 
•other has a circular tower in five storeys, diminishing in diameter 
as it rises with a spiral pathway round, which recalls that of the 
ziggurat at Khorsdbftd. According to Terrien de Lacouperie,* in 
his work on the western origin of early Chinese civilisation, the 
relations of Chaldea and China date back to the 23rd century 
B.C., when the Bak tribes migrated east from Elam and Babylonia 
into China, bringing with them the custom of building in brick, 
the erection of lofty towers for astronomical purposes, the 
cutting of canals, embanking of rivers, and other elements of 
their western civilisation. Of later date, but showing how the 
traditional form of these towers was handed do^vn in the East, 
at Samara on the Tigris, 60 miles north of B8ghdid and 


* * L’Art Cliinois/ pp. lox and 103. 

* Terrien de Lacouperie, ‘ Western Ongiu of Chinese Civilisation,' 1^94. 



Chap. III. 


T’AIS OR PAGODAS, 


469 


attached to the mosque founded there in the 9th century of our 
era, by the grandson of Hftrfln al Rashtd, there still exists a 
minaret in brick, about 160 ft. in height, with spiral passage 
winding round, almost identical with that represented in one of 
these Chinese drawings, beingr crowned wifti a circular turret 
instead of the pavilion shown in the Chinese drawing. There are 
no examples in China with external winding paths or flights of 
steps, these latter are usually enclosed wiuin the brick walls, 
which are sometimes of great Sickness, those in the Pa-li Chwang 
Pagoda, near Pekin, measuring 18ft. In the T*ien-pong-tah, the 
hexagonal seven-storeyed pagoda at Ningpo, which is 160 ft. 
high, there is a flight of narrow steps ascending spirally within 
the walls. Again, according to Dr. Bushell,^ in his work on 
Chinese Art, the first large buildings described in the oldest 
canonical books are the lofty square towers in stone called fai, 
of which there are three kinds, viz.: for astronomical purposes, 
for watch towers and for treasuries or storerooms. The 
traditional representations of these are those found in the 
observatory of Pekin, a square tower on the city wall, the towers 
of the great wall, which are built in stone with arched heads to 
both doors and windows, shoadng that, as might have been 
expected from their early contact with Chaldea, the Chinese 
were well acquainted with both arch and vault, and the square 
towers occasionally on the entrance gateways to the towns and 
elsewhere on the city walls which are now utilised as military 
storerooms ; to these might be added the t’ais or pagodas, which 
though octa^nal instead of square on plan, now sometimes 
serve as repositories for numerous statues of Buddha. Whatever 
their origin may have been, the fais are now identified more 
with geomancy than with the Buddhist religion, and although 
some of them contain idols, and in the north have frequently 
a statue of Buddha on the lower storey, above they con- 
sist of solid walls with external balconies used as belvederes 
or watch towers. The number of these pagodas throughout 
the county is very great, and no town is said to be complete 
without one or more. 

Of those which existed in China in our own time the 
best known is the celebrated porcelain tower at Nankin* 
(Woo^ut No. 499). Commenced in the year 1412, and 
finished in 1431, it was erected as a monument of gratitude 
to an empress of the Ming family, and was, in consequence, 
generally called the Temple of Gratitude. It was octagonal 
in form, 236 ft. in height, of which, however, about 30 ft. must 


’ 'Cbinew Alt,’ p. 53. 

* The tower wee deetroyed in 1S54 daring the Taeping rehellion. 



470 CHINESE ARCHITECTURE. Book IX. 

be deducted for the iron spire that surmounted it, leaving 
little more than 200 ft. for the elevation of the building, or 

about the height of the 
Monument of London. 
From the summit of the 
spire eight chains were 
suspended, to each of 
which were attached 
nine bells, and a bell 
was also attached to 
each angle of the lower 
roofs, making 144 bells 
in all, which, when 
tinkling in harmony to 
the evening breeze, must 
have produced an effect 
as singular as pleasing. 
It was not, however, 
either to its dimensions 
or its bells that the 
tower owed its celebrity, 
but to the coating of 
porcelain which clothed 
its brick wails, as well 
as the upper and under 
sides of the projecting 
roofs, which mark the 
division of each storey. 
The porcelain produced 
499. Porcelain Tower. Nankin. ^ brilliancy of effect 

which is totally lost in all the representations of it yet 
published, but which was, in fact, that on which the architect 
almost wholly relied for producing the effect be desired, and 
without which his design is a mere skeleton. 

Another celebrated pagoda is that known as “ Second Bar 
Pagoda,” on the Canton River. It is a pillar of victory, erected 
to commemorate a naval battle which the Chinese claim to have 
gained near the spot. It is, in design, nearly identical with that 
of Nankin, but of smaller dimensions, and is now fast falling 
to ruin. 

These two are of the usual and most typical form, and so 
like Hundreds of others, that it is impossible to deduce any 
sequence from them with such re;presentations as we now 
possess. Though pleasing and purposelike, as well as original, 
they ere somewhat monotonous in design. A tower divided 
into nine equal and similar storeys is a very inferior design 




Chap. III. 


T’AIS OR PAGODAS. 


47 * 


to that of the miners' of the Muhammadans, or the ordinary 
spires of Christian churches; and, if all were like these, we 
should be forced to deny the Chinese the faculty of invention 
in architecture. In the north, however, the forms seem much 



500. Pagoda in Summer Palace, Pekin. (From a Pbotograph bjr Beato.) 


more various. One in the Summer Palace (Woodcut No. 500) 
is divided into three storeys, with additional projecting eaves 
under the balconies. Four of the sides of the octagon are 
longer than the other four, and altogether there is a play of 
light and shade, and a variety about the ornaments in this 
tower, which is extremely pleasing. It is much more like an 
Indian design than any other known in China, and with the 


47 * 


CHINESE ARCHITECTURE. 


Book IX. 


drde of pillan round its base, and the ISt or Stambha, which 
usually accompany these objects further west, it recalled the 
or^gfina) forms as completely as any other object in this countiy. 

In direct contrast to this is the Pa>li-Chwang Pagoda 
(Plate LIX.), about 15 miles east of Pekin. Its thirteen 
stoics are almost more monotonous than those of the Nankin 
tower, but th^ are merely projecting eaves, which take the 
place of string-courses. Although of slight projection, the eaves 
are supported by groups of brackets which take the place of a 
frieze. The ground storey is of greater importance than usual, 
it is pierced .with arched doorways and windows on alternate 
fiices, and is raised on a lofty ped^tal enriched with mouldings 
and carvings, altogether constituting an imposing architectural 
structure like the Orissan temples, to wmch it bears some 
resemblance. The interior is lighted by small openings between 
the bracket clusters. In contrast with this is the Su-chaw 
p^foda, with nine storeys, of great height but devoid of any 
architectural design, the upturned comers of the eaves being 
extremely ugly. 

It is extremely difficult to form a correct estimate of the 
artistic merits of these towers. Edifices so- original and so 
national must be intmesting from that cir9umstance alone, and 
it seems almost impossible to build anything in a tower-like 
form of grbat height whether as a steeple, a min&r, or a pagoda, 
which shall not form a pleasing object from its salience and 
aspiring character alone, even without any real artistic merit 
in itself Besides these qualifications, I cannot but think that 
the tapering octagonal form, the boldly marked divisions, the 
domical roof, and ^eral consistence in design and ornament 
of these towers, entitle them to rank tolerably high among the 
■ tower-like buildings of the world. 

P‘AI-LUS. 

The Fai-lus or P'ai-fangs, sometimes utilised as entrance 
gateways to temples and tombs, are another class of monument 
almost as frequently met with in Chinese scenery as the nine- 
storeyed pagodas, and consequently nearly as familiar to the 
Euit^rean eye. Their origin is as distinctly Indian as the other, 
thoi^h, from their nature, being easily overthrown, but few 
exam^es can be found in a country that has so long ceased 
to be Buddhist. Fortunately, however, we still possess in the 
gateway of Sinchi (Woodcut No. 12) the typical example of the 
whole class ; and we find them afterwards represented in bas- 
rtiidls and in frescoes in a manner to leave no doubt of the 
frequency of their application, 



Chap. III. 


P'AI-LUS. 


473 


In China they seem almost universally to be employed as 
honorific monuments of deceased persons — either men of dis- 


tinction, or widows who 
have not married again, 
or virgins who have died 
unmarried. Frequently 
they are still constructed 
in wood, and when stone 
is used they retain to 
this hour the forms and 
details of wooden con- 
struction. Whatever the 
material, they consist of 
either two, four, or six 
posts, set either on the 
ground, so as to allow a 
passage through, or on 
a platform, as in Wood- 
cut No. 501, though this 
is quite an exceptional 
form, their more usual 



position being in front 501, P'ai-lu near Canton. (From a Sketch Mr. 

of some temple or tomb, Fergusson.) 

as in Woodcut No. 493, or of an avenue leading to a tomb, as in 


the case of that leading to the Ming tombs in which there are 


five openings. Occasionally they span a street, as in that 
shown in Woodcut No. 503 at Amoy. 


The posts or piers always carry a rail or frieze bearing an 
inscription, which is in fact the object for which the monument 
was erected. The most singular features about them are the 


tile roofs at various levels, with which they are surmounted. 


probably for protection, but which, forming heavy masses 
widely projecting on each side, are exposed to serious injury 
from tempests. In Woodcut No. 502, representing a gateway 
at Pekin, it will be noticed that these roofs are carried a 
series of superposed brackets in groups copied from those which 
support the eaves-roofs of the temples. Between the bracket 
groups which apparently rest only on the top of the walls, there 
are openings which give to the latter the appearance of being 
later additions. The P‘ai-lu serving as the portal of the 


cenotaph in white marble (Woodcut No. 493 ), though built in 
stone, is a direct copy of timber construction, the cross-beams 
being tenoned into the piers and having brackets under them to 
lessen the bearing, here the bracket groups are all in stone, but 
not pierced between. In the P'ai-lus erected in front of the 
Hall of Buddha in the Summer Palace (Plate LVIII.), and 


474 


CHINESE ARCHITECTURE. 


Book IX. 


of the Temple of Confucius in Pekin (Woodcut No. 502), 



Chinese P'ai-lu. Temple of Confucius, Pekin, (From * L*architccture,* 1905.) 




Chap. III. 


P*AI-LUS. 


475 


although the upper portions are copied from wooden construc- 
tions, the entrance doorways have semi-circular arches and 
belong therefore to arcuated and not trabeated construction. 

Probably the Chinese would have spent more pains on their 
tombs had thqr not hit on the happy device of separating the 
monument from the sepulchre. We do so in exceptional cases, 
when we erect statues and pillars or other monuments to our 
great men on hill-tops or in market-places; but as a rule, a 



man’s monument is placed where his body is laid, though it 
would probably be difficult to assign a good logical reason 
for the practice. The great peculiarity of China is that in 
nine cases out of ten they effect these objects by processes 
which are exactly the reverse of those of Europe, and in most 
cases it is not easy to decide which is best. In erecting the 
P‘m-lu, or monument, in a conspicuous place apart from the 
sepulchre, thqr seem to have shown their usual common sense, 
though an architect must regret that the designs of thdr tombs 
suffered in consequence, and have none of that' magnificence 
which we should expect amon^ a people at all times so addicted 
to ancestral worship as the Chinese. 

In an historical point of view, the most curious thing con- 
nected with these P'ai-lus seems to be, that at S&nchi, before 


476 CHINESE ARCHITECTURE. Book IX. 

the Christian Era, we find them used as gateways to a simulated 
tomb. In India both the tumulus and the P‘ai-lu had at that 
time passed away from their original sepulchral meaning; 
the one had become a relic -shrine, the other an iconostasis. 
Two thousand years afterwards in China we find them both 
still used for the purposes for which they were originally 
designed. 

Palaces and Domestic Architecture. 

From what has been already said, it will be understood that 
there is virtually no difference in the architectural design of 
the temples and palaces; in both cases the halls and palaces 
consist of a numb^ of pavilions rather than of numerous suites 
of apartments and halls, as is usually the case in Europe, 
and consequently they never attain the magnitude essential 
to architectural dignity. The resemblance of temple and palace 
is further accentuated by the fact that in front of the great 
hall of the palace in the Forbidden City are similar platforms 
with the triple terrace, balusttade, and flights of steps, which 
have been described in the Temple of Heaven and the tomb 
of Yung-lo. Unfortunately, the absence of plans makes it 
impossible to connect the various buildings one with the other. 
From a bird’s-eye view of the Forbidden City (Tzu-chin-ch’eng) 
it would seem that the buildings therein contained are all of 
one storey, and surmounted with the same type of roof as that 
employed in the temples ; and as the main fronts of the building 
all face soudi, there is a general monotony of appearance, varied 
only by the height of the several structures, according to their 
importance. The three principal halls are the Tai-ho-t’ien, or 
Hall of Highest Peace (built 1602-1722), where levies are held 
on special occasions, the Chung-ho-t’ien, or Hall of Central 
Peace, and the Pao-ho-t’ien, or Hall of Secure Peace. The 
first named is the most important, and it is prweded by what 
is called a gateway, which externally is similar to the Tai-ho- 
t’ien in design, but has nine bays instead of eleven on the main 
front; it is idso raised on a platform with a triple terrace, 
balustrade, and flights of steps. 

The plan of the Tai-ho-t’ien will be best understood by 
reference to Woodcut No. 504, which is the type of all the 
larger temples and halls. The principal front faces the south, 
and the hall is raised on a lofty platform with three terraces 
(A, A, A), rising one above the other and enclosed by balustrades : 
three flights of steps (B, B, B), give access to the uppor terrace, 
a portion of the central flight, having in the middle, instead of 
steps, an inclined slope (C) with dragons and clouds carved 
thereon in bas-relief ; the treads of the steps are also carved, 



Chap. III. PALACES AND DO.MESTIC ARCHITECTURE. 477 

but in lower relief. In front of the hall, which consists of eleven 
bays, is the open verandah (D, D), and the hall beyond is divided 
longitudinally into central and side aisles, the former being of 
the same width as the central bay of the main front Virtually, 
therefore, the plan is similar to that of a European church, 
with nave and aisles running east and west, and a central 
transept with the principal entrance (E) at its south end, and 
the Imperial dais (F) in the north transept. The only light 



The 'J-ai-ho Hall. Pekin. 


admitted is that which enters through the entrance door, the 
glazed screens in the rear of the verandah, and three others 
on the north side. All the side bays and the remaining eight 
on the north side are filled in with walls in brick, which are 
plastered over on the inside and outside, and rise to the soffit of 
the lowest transverse beam. Externally these walls have a very 
ugly effect, especially as the beams and groups of brackets above 
are all richly painted in various colours and in part gilded. The 
roof of the hall is carried on forty columns about 30 ft. high, and 
of which the diameter is 3 ft. 5 in.; the coffered ceiling is carried 
on great beams at two different levels with bracketing between 
them and round the hall. The four central columns are gilded 
with tapestry or damask designs in relief, the others are painted 
red, and the beams and ceiling gilded and painted in bright 
colours. The columns of the verandah, the east and west narrow 
bays and the store*room and central recess in the rear are 20 ft. 
high, and carry a lower roof with bracketed eaves, and this with 
the eaves of the principal roof over the hall gives the appearance 



CHINESE ARCHITECTURE. 


Book IX. 


47 * 


to which reference has been made of a double>eaved roof. The 
north bay of the hall is roofed at the same level as the verandah, 
and in the section (Woodcut No. 505) it will be seen that the 
filling^in of the main walls of the whole hall, and against which 
the' verandah roof rests, consists of a series of beams one above 
the other, tenoned into the great columns, the spaces between 
them being treated as friezes and decorated with various designs. 

With the exception of the ancestral temple of Yung>lo, the 
Tai'ho Hall is perhaps the largest in China, but in its design 



it contains the elementary construction of all the temples 
■and halls; sometimes the verandah is carried along the east 
and west ends, but on the north side it is included in the hall, 
being covered over with a roof at a lower level. The east 
and west bays are used for various purposes connected with 
the structure, whether temple, hall, or palace, and in the 
latter sometimes utilised as bedrooms or boudoirs. As a rule 
the hails are ceiled above the tie-beam; the ceiling being 
divided into coffers; more importance is given to the central 
bay, which is sunk into deep coffers with bracket friezes 
round them. Some of the halls are covered with an open 
timber roof, in which the unwrought rafters covering the roof 
contrast wiA the elaborate painting and gilding of the columns 
and the heavy superposed beams of the root There does not 
seem to be any rule regulating the east and west ends of the 
main roof ; sometimes &ese are hipped, as in the Tai-ho Hall 
and the Hall of the Classics, sometimes the Frimoya prevails. 



Chap. III. 


DOMESTIC ARCHITECTURE. 


479 


but in both cases the hips have heavy rolls covering them, 
crowned with a series of miniature griffons. The greater number 
of the buildings in the Forbidden City have one storey only; 
to these there are some exceptions, where an upper floor, of 
the same height as the verandah storey, is carried on the level 
of the upper portion of the roof of same, and has a projecting 
balcony round the outside. In these cases there are windows 
to light the storey. In the Wan-fo pavilion there are three 
storeys all with verandahs. 

Domestic Architecture. 

It is in their domestic architecture, if in any, that the 
Chinese excel; there we do not look either for monumental 
grandeur or for durability, and it is almost impossible to resist 
being captivated by the gaiety and brilliancy of a Chinese 
dwelling of the first class, and the exuberant richness and 
beauty of the carvings and ornaments that are heaped on 
every part of It. 

The principal difference between the palaces and the 
Chinese dwellings of the better class lies in a much lighter 
system of construction, there is the same general disposition 
of the plan, viz., a series of detached blocks, separated by 
open courts or gardens and placed in communication with 
one another by covered corridors. All Chinese habitations, 
however, are subjected to official rules, which prescribe tiie 
dimensions in width and height, and the number of columns 
which may be used. The principal hall, for instance, is not 
allowed to be wider than three bays, if for a man of letters 
only ; five, if for a mandarin, seven for a prince, and only the 
palace of the emperor may have nine or more bays. These 
rules, which have from time immemorial been strictly enforced, 
have curtailed the development of style, so that the architect 
has only been able to exercise his originality in details of a 
decorative kind, and this probably accounts for the overloading 
of the structure with useless ornament, or in the accentuation 
of the curves given to the ridge cresting, and the raising of the 
ends of the eaves at the angles to such an extent as some* 
times to cany the water falling on them back into the roof. In 
the arrangement of their houses there is, however, no longer 
the rigid symmetry which governs their temples or palaces. 
When on level ground they are surrounded by picturesque 
gardens with small lakes, on the borders of which the principal 
reception rooms are built, with terraces and marble balustrades ; 
and, if in a hilly country, every advant^^e is taken to place 
their pavilions on prominent sites, so as to command the best 



480 


CHINESE ARCHITECTURE. 


Book IX. 


views and add to the beauty of the landscape. The same 
remark applies equally to portions of the Summer Palace ; those 
parts of the palace which faced the lake were symmetrically 
arranged round an immense court, but on each side the pavilions 
and terraces were planned to obtain picturesque effects either 






\\r 







1 

1 

1 , 

1 












506. Pavilion in the Summer Pnlace. Pekin. (From a Photograph by Bcato.) 

overlooking the lake, or when in the rear where the ground 
rises rapidly, to emphasise the various eminences. Woodcut 
No. 506 is a good example of one of these pavilions in the 
Summer Palace, which, when interspersed with trees and water 
and. rocky scenery, aid in makii^ up a very fairy-like landscape, 



Chap. in. DOMESTIC ARCHITECTURE. 481 

but can scarcely be considered as an object of dignified 
architecture. 

It is not so much on its forms that Chinese architecture 
depends as on its colours, and those in the roofs of the palaces 
in Pekin covered with yellow glazed tiles — a colour restricted 
to royal structures — ^have an exceptional magnificence, as also 
the ultramarine blue tiles of the Temple of Heaven. There 
is also a great variety of colour in the crested ridges and the 
terminations of the covering tiles, which goes far to redeem the 
exaggeration of their curved eaves — the columns are usually 
painted red, the friezes and openwork green. Blue marks the 
floors and stronger lines, and gilding is used profusely every- 
where. Whether this would improve a finer or more solid style 
of art may admit of doubt; but it is certainly remarkably 
pleasing in China, and singularly appropriate to the architecture 
we have been describing; and grouped as these buildings 
usually are around garden courts, filled with the gayest flowers, 
and adorned with rock-work and fountains more fantastic than 
the buildings themselves, the fancy may* easily be charmed with 
the result, though taste forbids us to approve of the details. 

Occasionally, however, the Chinese attempted something 
more monumental, but without much success. Where glass is 
not available of sufficient size and in sufficient quantities to 
glaze the windows, there is a difficulty in so arranging them 
that the room shall not be utterly dark when the shutters are 
closed, and that the rain shall not penetrate when they are open. 
In wooden construction these difficulties are much more easily 
avoided ; deep projecting eaves, and light screens, open at the 
top, obviate most of them : at least, so the Chinese always 
thought, and they, consequently, have had very little practice 
in the construction of solid architecture. It is singular therefore 
that in the Buddhist temple in the Summer Palace near Pekin 
(Woodcut No. 494 and Plate LVIII.) they should have been 
able to produce a structure which is remarkable for its elegance 
and good design. 

Their most successful efforts in this direction, however, were 
when they combined a solid basement of masonry with a light 
superstructure of wood, as in the Winter Palace at Pekin 
(Woodcut No. 506). In this instance the height and solidity of 
the basement give sufficient dignity to the mass, and the light 
superstructure is an appropriate termination upwards. 

This last illustration is interesting, because it enables us to 
realise to a certain extent what may have been the general 
effect of the palaces of Nineveh and Khorsftbftd in the days of 
their splendour. Like this palace, they were raised on a solid 
basement crowned with battlements, the superstructure, however, 



482 


CHINESE ARCHITECTURE. 


Book IX. 


externally at ail events, being of a more solid nature, with flat 
terraced roofs instead of those covered with tiles as in Pekin. 

The resemblance, however, is curious, and as there are 
numerous examples throughout the empire in which, instead of 
the plain beams as shown in Woodcut No. 505, are circular and 



507. View in the Winter Palace, Pekin. (From a Photograph.) 


pointed arched openings, they may be taken as some evidence 
of the origin of Chinese architecture already mentioned (p. 466), 
showing that in these great arched gateways they were continu- 
. ing the tradition of the earlier examples in the Great Wall of 
China, which bear the closest resemblance, both in design and 
construction, to the entrance gateways of the Assyrian palaces. 

The engineering works of the Chinese have been much 
extolled by some writers, but have less claim to praise as works 
of science than their buildings have as works of art. Their 
canals, it is true, are extensive; but with 300,000,000 of 
inhabitants this is small praise, and their construction is most 
unscientific. Their bridges, too, are sometimes of great length, 
but generally made up of a series of small arches constructed 
on the horizontal-bracket principle, as nine-tenths of the bridges 
in China are, and consequently narrow and unstable. 

To these, however, there are many notable exceptions, in 
which the principle of arched and vaulted constructions, as in 
tlie marble bridge with seventeen arches in the Summer PalMe 
near Pekin, witli sumptuous balustrades, all in white marble, a 


Crap. III. 


DOMESTIC ARCHITECTURE. 


483 


second example, also in white marble, with nine arches, in 
Pekin, and a third at Pusilanghi across the Hun>h6 river, of 
immense length, having a balustrade of vertical slabs between 
posts or piers, with lions carved on each, the whole structure 
being in white marble. 

Their most remarkable engineering work is certainly the 
Great Wall, which defends the whole northern frontier of 
the country, extending over hill and dale for more than 1200 
miles as the crow flies. It is, however, of very varying strength 
in different places, and seems to be strongest and highest in the 
neighbourhood of Pekin, where it has generally bmn seen by 
Europeans. There it is 20 ft in height, and its average thick* 
ness is 25 ft. at the base, tapering to 15 ft. at the summit 
There are also towers at short distances whose dimensions are 
generally about double those just quoted for the wall.* 

However absurd such a wall may be as a defensive expedient, 
it proves that at least in 200 B.C. the Chinese were capable of 
conceiving and executing works on as great a scale as any ever 
undertaken in Egypt The wonder is, that a people who 2000 
years ago were competent to such undertakings should have 
attempted nothing on the same scale since that time. With their 
increasing population and accumulating wealth we might have 
expected their subsequent works to have far surpassed those of 
the Egyptians. It, however, remains a problem to be solved, 
why nothing on so grand a scale was ever afterwards attempted. 

In the rear of the Great Wall, in the Nan-kau Pass, there 
is an archway of some architectural pretension, and which is 
interesting as having a well-ascertained date, A.D. 1345.* Its 
dimensions are considerable, and it is erected in a bold style 
of masonry (Woodcut No. 508). The upper part is a true arch, 
though it was thought necessary to disguise this by converting 
its form into that of a semi-octagon, or three-sided arch. On 
the keystone is a figure of Garuda, and on either side of him a 
N&ga figure, with a seven-headed snake hood, and beyond that 
a class of flowing tracery we are very familiar with in India 
about the period of its erection. Its similarity to the Nepalese 
gateway at Bhatg&on (Woodcut No. i6o) has already been 
remarked upon, and altogether it is interesting, as exemplifying 
a class of Indian ornamentation that came into China from the 
north. If we had a few specimens of art penetrating from the 
south, we might find out the secret of the history of Buddhist 
art in China. 

» An intere«ting series of photographs * ‘ J ournal of the Rtqral Asiatic Society,’ 
of the Great Wall have been reproduced vol. vii. p. 331 ; N.S. vol. v. pp. 14, tt 
in Dr. Wm. Edgar Geil’s work, ‘The wgg. 

Great Wall of Cluna,’ 1909. 



484 CHINESE ARCHITECTURE. Book IX. 

However admirable and ingenious the modern Chinese 
may be, it is in the minor arts — such as carving in wood and 



508. Archway in the Nan-kau Pass. (From a Photograph.) 


ivory, the manufacture of vessels of porcelain and bronze, 
and all that relates to silk and cotton manufactures. In these 
they certainly excel, and reached a high degree of perfec- 
tion while Europe was still barbarous, but in all the higher 
branches of art they take a very low position, and seem utterly 
unprogressive. 

Their sculpture is more carving than anything we know by 
the higher name, and although in their painting they would 
seem, at one time, to have been far in advance of that found 
in Europe, both in the complete maturity of the art and in 
the mastery of the brush, within the last 300 years there has 
been a serious decline, so that it now scarcely rises above the 
level of decoration. Their architecture also stands on the same 



Chap. III. DOMESTIC ARCHITECTURE. 485 

low level as their other arts, it is rich, ornamental, and appro- 
priate for domestic purposes, but ephemeral and totally wanting 
in dignity and grandeur of conception. Still it is pleasing, 
because truthful; but after all, its great merit in the eyes of 
the student of architecture will probably turn out to rest on 
the light it throws on the earlier styles, and on the ethno- 
graphic relations of China to the surrounding nations of 
Eastern Asia. 



CHAPTER IV. 
JAPAN. 

INTRODUCTORY. 


Accession of the first Mikado 

C quest of Korea by the 
w.«ipress Jin-go 

Buddliism ioti;oduced from 
Korea 

Kid-to made the capital 
The Shogunate established 
at Kama-kura by Yori-tomo A.n. 1192 

Ashi-kaga dynasty of Shdguns 1338-1573 


Y edo (now T6kio) founded 
by leyasu . . . 1590 

Ilide-yoshi invades Korea A. i). 1 592- 1 598 
Toku-gawa dynasty of 
Shdguns . . A. I). 1603-1868 

Japan closed to all for- 
eigners by lemitsu A.r>. 1640 
First treaties with Euro- 
pean powers . A.i). 1857-1859 

The Shogunate abolished 
and the Mikado restored a.d. 1868 


CHRONOLOGY-ORIGINAL SOURCES, ETC. 

B.C. 660 

A.D. 201 

A.D. 552 
A.I). 794 


The architecture of Japan owes its origin to Chinese sources, 
the earliest examples remaining being those which were built 
by carpenters sent over from Korea. The Japanese temples, 
whether Buddhist or Shintd, are all of the Chinese T’ing type, and 
the roofs covering them of I’rimoya design, as shown in Woodcut 
No. 489. In Japan eis in China the later developments have 
as a rule resulted only in further enrichments, the elaborate 
carving in the Japanese Buddhist temples being carried to 
excess. In the Shintd temple, on the other hand, the greatest 
simplicity prevails, more importance being attached to the 
quality of the wood employed, and to its structural execution, 
than to any display of diagram work or carving. The pagoda 
in Japan still retains the ancient design and timber construction 
of the earliest example remaining, at Hdriuji (Hdriuzi), which 
was built by Korean carpenters in A.D. 607, and may be looked 



Chap. IV. INTRODUCTORY. 487 

upon as the original type of, at all events, the Korean pagoda. 
The scarcity of wood in China would be sufficient to account for 
the employment of either brick or stone for the construction of 
their pagodas, and this is borne out by the two Chinese drawings 
in the National Library of Paris referred to on page 467, where 
the lower storeys are shown to be of solid construction in 
either brick or stone. The Japanese pagodas, on the other 
hand, even down to the present day, are all built in timber 
as being better able to resist the shock of earthquakes, and 
may be looked upon, therefore, as the survivals of those which 
formerly existed in Korea, in which country they are now 
however in stone or brick. 

The principal source of information on Japanese architecture 
is that which is derived from photographs, but much is to be 
learnt from the nteischos or guidebooks to the various provinces, 
which in Japan are largely illustrated, and from the prints by 
Hiro*shige, Yei-sen, and Toyo-kuni. The most valuable works 
on the subject are those by Herr F. von Baltzer,^ in which plans 
section and elevations are given of temples, pagodas, and other 
structures. The papers contributed by Prof. Josiah Conder* to 
the transactions and journal of the Institute of British Architects 
contain the most complete account of some of the temples and 
palaces, and are well illustrated. Of other works consulte' e 
those by Prof. B. H. Chamberlain, and Mr. W. B. Mason,* 
Mr. E. S. Morse,* M. Titsingh,® Mr. Ralph A. Cram,® and 
Dr. Dresser.^ 

It was not till the second half of the 6th century that Japan 
emerged from a state of barbarism, and its earliest architectural 
structures date from the commencement of the 7th century, 
when the introduction of Buddhism from China through Korea 
and its revelations stirred the Japanese people to a loftier con- 
ception than those which the older Shinto religion had inspired. 

The temple and pagoda at Horiuji near Nara (A.D. 607), 
the earliest buildings existing, are said to have been erected 
by carpenters from Korea, and in their design and execution 
present a completeness of style which must have taken several 


^ * Das Tapanische Haus eiiie Bau* 
lechnische Sludie ’ (1903). ‘ Die Archi- 

tektur des Kultbauten Japans ’ (1907). 

^ 'Notes on Japanese Architecture,’ 
in 'Tranuctions R.I.B.A., 1877-78,* vol. 
xxviii. pp. 179-92. * Further Notes and a 
Description of the Mausoleum at Nikko’ 
in the 'Transactions New Series, 1885- 
86/ vol. ii. pp. 185-214, and a third 
paper on the 'Domestic Architecture of 
Japan/ 1886-87, in vol. iii. pp. 103-27 


and 181-84. 

^ Murray’s Handbook to Japan, 8ih 
edition, 1907, 

^ 'Japanese Homes and their Sur- 
roundings,’ 1895. 

^ ' Illustrations of Japan ; Memoirs of 
the Djogouns,’ 1822. 

• 'Impressions of Japanese Architec- 
ture and the Allied Arts,’ 1905. 

^ 'Japan, its Architecture, Art, and 
Art Manufactures,’ 1882. 



488 JAPANESE ARCHITECTURE. Book IX. 

centuries to develop, but of which the sources are gone in con- 
sequence of the annihilation of all the early architecture of 
China. The earliest remains in the latter country are those of 
the t’ai or pagoda, which are almost universally octagonal on 
plan, and are built in stone or brick, whereas the example at 
Hdriuji is square on plan, and constructed entirely in timber. 
This would lead us at once to doubt the origin so far as China 
is concerned, especially as in the early records of the Chinese 
Empire the t’ais are described as being usually square, some- 
times of great height and always built in stone to serve as 
watch towers, treasuries, or store-rooms. 

If, on account of their differences in plan and the material 
of their construction, there is any doubt as to the origin of the 
Japanese pagoda, there can be none as regards that of the 
temple at Hdriuji, which represents the simpler type of the 
T'ing design with Frimoya side gables identical with those of 
the temples, palaces, and great halls already described in China. 
It is, however, not only in the main design but in their construc- 
tive and decorative details that the general resemblance is 
shown ; the groups of brackets which support the eaves qf the 
Hdriuji temple and pagoda are found in all the Chinese temples 
and halls, and in the later examples *the employment of the 
bracket-groups as the decoration in their friezes is found both 
in Japan and China, so that it would be impossible, except for 
other reasons, to distinguish between those of the temple at 
Nikkd and the temples and halls in the Forbidden City of 
Pekin. 

In Japan, as in China, where the stereotyped form of roof 
and its supports seems to have been fixed for all time, the only 
variety the architect would seem to have been allowed to intro- 
duce into his design was its over-elaboration with painting and 
carving, and this during the last two centuries has in a measure 
destroyed the simplicity of their earlier work. The framing of 
the Japanese roofs, however, is, as a rule, superior to that of the 
Chinese, and in the designs for those of the smaller structures, 
such as the SMrd or belfry and the Kord or drum tower in 
their temple enclosures, and the entrance doorways, fences, 
and screens of their domestic architecture, they display a 
fertility of invention and a remarkable execution in the framing 
which places them in the first rank as carpenters; like the 
Chinese, however, they have never understood how to truss their 
timbers, so that in their roofs there is the same ponderous con- 
struction with immense beams one above the other similar to 
those found in China. 

As already stated, the Chinese temples and halls have no 
clerestory windows, the light being admitted only through the 



Chat. IV. 


INTRODUCTORY. 


4*9 


doorways and the windows in the rear of the verandah, but in 
the more ancient temples at Hdriuji and Nara in Jiipan, the 
designs of which were introduced from China through Korea, 
there are large openings above the verandah roof and between 
the columns and beams which carry the main roof; these 
opmings were probably closed with paper or some other 
transparent material, and to give facilities to keep this in proper 
repair, narrow balconies are carried round as shown in Plate LX. 
Already also at a very early period the column verandah was 
dispensed with in the majority of the temples, its place being 
taken by a balcony carried on corbels or brackets tenoned into 
the columns of the main hall, this balcony being always carried 
round on three sides and sometimes in the rear. 

Sufficient protection from the weather was given to this 
balcony by the wide projection of the eaves of the main roof, 
and consequently the double eaves of the Chinese temple were 
not required. 

Next to the main temple the most important structure is 
the entrance gateway ; in China the chief entrance was through 
a p‘ai-lu, which was sometimes isolated and at a long distance 
from the temple. In Japan it forms the entrance to each 
enclosure, and is generally in two storeys ; one of the earliest 
examples is that shown in Plate LX. b^ween the temple and 
the psigoda at Hdriuji : if this is compared with the Y6>mei<mon 
Gate at Nikkd built under the Toku>gawa Shdguns, Plate LXI., 
great decadence which has taken place in the style will be 
easily recognised in the over-elaboration of the more modem 
structure, where dragons and unicorns are carved in every 
possible position, and in which the simple curves of the rrimo)m 
roof have been changed for those of a more complex nature. 




509< Bird’s-eye View of the Buddhist Temple of 


t. Entrance gateway (Y6-inei-nion). 5. Founder’s Hall (Soshi-d6). 

2. Ex-voto Hall (Ema-dd). 6. Reliquary (Tah6-td). 

3. Bdfry (Shdr 5 ). 7- Library (RinsO). 

4. Main temple (Hondo). 8. Priest's rooms (H6j6). 





CHAPTER V. 


Japanese Temples at HAriuji, Nara, and Nikk6— Pagodas— Palaces— 
Domestic Architecture. 

The Japanese temples, like those in China, consist of a number 
of isolated structures situated generally within three enclosures, 
the number of these structures and their dimensions varying 
according to the importance of the temple and its requirements, 
some of them not being found in thpse temples built for the 
Shintd religion; the architecture of the latter is also much 
simpler, and plain white Keyaki wood posts are employed to 
carry the roofs which, in the earlier examples and still in 
temples of small importance, are covered with thatch only; 
the Buddhist temples, on the qther hand, are not only richly 
painted, lacquered and gilded, but are enriched with carving 
of the most elaborate description. 

In the selection of the sites for their temples, ascending 
ground, often the side of a hill, would seem to be preferred, 
not only to obtain a greater eminence for the main shrine 
Hondo {Honda if Buddhist, Honden if in a Shintd temple), 
but to ^ve more dignity to the approach up wide flights 
of steps, between avenues of trees alternating with stone 
or bronze memorial lanterns. Generally speaking, the ohter 
enclosure consists only of a low wall with wood fence ; the 
second was of more importance, the enclosure sometimes taking 
the form of a covered promenade for the priests, and it was 
entered through a magnificent gateway {Yd-nui-mon') in two 
stores, the upper one used as a muniment room. The third 
enclosure in which the temple was placed consisted of a 
lofty screen wall panelled and enriched with pierced screens 
elaTOrately carved and covered with a tile roof with projecting 
eaves on both sides ; in this case the entrance gateway might 
consist of a porch only {Kara-inon') with extreme^ rich decora- 
tions. In afl cases the gateways are preceded by flights of 
steps varying in number according to the slope of the site. 
This was the usual arrangement in the plans of both Shintd 
and Buddhist temples, but it was sometimes departed from 
in cases where the irregularity of the site called for a more 
ptettiresque grouping of the several structures of which the 
J^Minese artist never failed to avail himself. ^ This grouping, is 
shown in the woodcut No. 509, a r^roduction of one of the 



Chap. V. JAPANESE TEMPLES. 493 

illustrations in a Japanese tneischo or guidebook which r^«> 
sented the Buddhist temple of Ikc^mi near T6kia The 
Soshi-dd or founder’s hall (Fig. 5) is celebrated as the spot 
where the Buddhist saint Nichiren died in 1282 A.D. It will be 
noted here that the roofs of all the structures are of the Frimoya 
type, as shown in Woodcut No. 490. Anotiier remarkable 
example is the temple at Miyajima or Itsuku-shima which was 
built on an island, and here the Tori-i, which precedes all the 
Shintd temples, and sometimes the Buddhist, stands right out 
in the sea, the temple being built on piles as the various other 
structures, all of which are connected by open galleries, the 
whole temple being surrounded by water at high tide. 

The general design of the Japanese temples and mausolea 
(for in many cases the more important buildings within the 
enclosure are the burial-places of the Daimyos or Princes), 
corresponds closely with those in China, where the roof is 
always the ruling feature, and dictates the number and position 
of the columns provided to carry it There would seem to be 
some definite standard probably regulated by the Ken or mat 
with which the floors are covered, and this prescribes the 
intercolumniation of the columns and supports. Sometimes the 
temple block is divided into three halls, the oratory {Maiden) 
one intervening hall and the sanctuary {Hondo) with the reliquary 
shrine, and these all come under one roof, an arrangement not 
found in China. 

The main level of the floor of the temple is always raised 
from 4 to 6 ft. above the ground, so that a flight of steps is 
required in front leading to the entrance doors of the oratory, 
and to a verandah carried round the whole structure, over which 
the widely projecting eaves of the roof projects. This verandah 
is generally carried on projecting brackets attached to. the main 
columns of the temple which are supported on isolated stone 
piers and bases, and not on a continuous wall such as exists in 
all European foundation walls. Sometimes in addition to this 
verandah or gallery there is a colonnaded loggia along the front 
of the building extending down the sides, the roof of this loggia 
sloping like that of the main roof. The ancient temple of 
Hdriuji (Plate LX.) is thus planned, and the inner row of columns 
Mng much loftier than those in the front, give the appearance 
of an upper storey. The same arrangement is found occasionally 
in later examples as in the Nishi Hongwanji temples at Nagoya 
and Kid-to, thus retaining the traditional features of the Chinese 
temples with their double eaves. 

In front of the temple and over the flight of steps leading 
thereto is a portico carried by columns ovw which a portion of 
the main roof is prolonged, and this during the Toku • gawa 



494 JAPANESE ARCHITECTURE. Book IX. 

period was further accentuated by the raising of the roof in the 
centre ; sometimes, however, the portico is covered by a gable 
roof cutting into the main roof, this gable having a double curve 
— being convex at the top and concave near the eaves. The 
introduction of this intersecting gable would seem to date from 
the 17th century, and probably owes its origin to European 
sources. The raising of the roof eaves in the centre of the main 
front is often found in cases where there is no porch, probably in 
order to give more importance to the entrance door underneath, 
consequently it is almost invariably found in the entrance gate- 
ways, and is the principal, if not almost the only, development 
introduced in later times. 

The design of the Japanese roof is so nearly identical with 
that in China that no further description is necessary, except 
that in the place of the bright yellow, blue and green glazed 
tiles found in China, those in Japan of the present day are either 
black or smoke- burnt, even in some of the more important 
temples the tile work has been replaced by wooden tiles and 
terminals covered separately with thick copper plates. This, 
however, has not the fine decorative efiect of the glazed tiles, 
but the weight over the roof must in consequence be consider- 
ably diminished. 

As in China, the ridge at its termination and the heavy rolls 
descen^ng at each end are all more or less accentuated by their 
dimensions, and by grotesque representations of dragons ; the 
elateration of the brackets under the eaves is carried still further 
by carving the more projecting portions in the shape of dragons, 
and tUs fabulous animal is virtually allowed to run wild on the 
porches of both entrance gateways and temples, so that in the 
more modem examples, where the wall surfaces and columns are 
idso either carved or painted, there is absolutely no repose. 

Passing to the internal design of the temples ; in the earlier 
examples ftie roof would seem to be of that description which 
is known to us as an open timber roof, showing the rafters 
which carry the tiles. The entire absence of trussing has 
already been referred to in speaking of Chinese roofs, and 
the example of Sangatsu-do at Todaiji Nara (Woodcut No. 510) 
dating from the 8th century, is interesting as it shows that at 
this early date roof timbers of considerable size were employed, 
and that the beams were cambered or curved upwards in the 
centre to provide against sagging. It is, however, strange 
that the Japanese carpenters whose work as regards execution 
and finish is of the highest order, should have remained ignorant 
ojfthe i^ue of (lie trussing of timber, and of the emplo}rment of 
diagonal bracing : to the absence of this knowledge, and in some 
measure to the weakness of the foundations consisting only of 



Chap. V. JAPANESE TEMPLES. 495 

square piers of stone sunk in the earth on which the columns 
rest, must be ascribed the complete wrecking which at rime* 
their temples and houses have imdeigone through earthquakes. 



5za Roof of Sangatsu-do. Todaiji, Nara. From Baltier. 

It would be difficult, in fact, to conceive a worse system of 
support than that found in the Japanese temples, instead of 
having continuous walls below the ground, such as exist in all 
European structures, into which the piers carrying the columns 
should be built and, sinking the bases of the columns into these 
piers, they rest on the top only, the result being that with any 
oscillation of the ground through earthquakes, the columns are 
shaken off, and in consequence of the immense weight of the roof 
complete ruin takes place. The preservation of the pagoda at 
Hdriuji is probably due to the fact that it was erect^ on a 
concrete foundation, and in more recent times the brick and 
stone walls erected in the European manner have stood whilst 
the timber structures have succumbed. Tlw ceilings of the 
Japanese temples are comparatively low; they are as a rule 
horizontal, being divided by ribs single Or coupled into square 
panels; a flutra cove is carried round the hall, imd below it 
is the bracketed frieze, which constitutes so important a 
decorative feature in Chinese architecture; the space between 
the brackets is in Japan filled with rich carvings o( birds and 




496 JAPANESE ARCHITECTURE. Book IX. 

animals real and fabulous, and flowers of which the chrysan- 
themum and the peony are the favourites. The columns 
supporting the ceiling and roof are either circular or square with 
the edges rounded oflf as in China, and in both cases the 
horizontal beams resting on brackets are tenoned into the 
column — there being no capital of any description ; the walls in 
the rear of the hall are panelled and, on the outside towards the 
loggia or gallery, one is left open between the columns for the 
admission of light which is, however, subdued by blinds in rich 
casing. The brick walls which in China are built in between the 
wood columns are not found in Japan, probably on account of 
the danger in case of earthquakes ; their place as a rule is taken 
by timber panelling which is protected by projecting eaves. 
Sometimes under the bracket frieze is a second deep band which 
is carved in panels of the same type as that referred to between 
the brackets and, if opening into the loggia or under the eaves, 
is pierced. The columns of the interior are generally lacquered, 
the upper portions being painted with patterns in diaper 
reproduced from embroideries or carpets, and similar to that 
which is found in the Chinese temples. In the sanctuary beyond 
the main hall these patterns are all diapered in gold as also the 
main portion of the beams and ceiling al>ove, and the great altar- 
pieces and shrines of the Sh6guns are all gilded. The most 
important display of these carved panels is that which is found 
in the immediate enclosure of the temple where the upper range 
will be carved with birds and flowers, the middle range with 
clouds and flying storks, and the lower range with geometrical 
devices. 

An example of this type of decoration is shown in Plate LXI. 
representing the great entrance gateway of the temple at 
Nikkd, the work of the Toku-gawa dynasty. Here also will be 
noticed the overloading of the structure with enriched ornament, 
where the. ends of the brackets are carved, with dragon heads, 
unicorns being employed to emphasise what in the earlier temples 
was only a constructive detail, viz., the projecting tenons of the 
horizontal beams which were thus secured to the columns. The 
curved gables in the centre of the principal and side facades 
with their heavy ridge crestings have quite destroyed the simpler 
design as shown in the Temple at H6riuji. As a contrast to the 
goigeous ostentation of the Buddhist temples and mausolea, and 
more especially those built during the Toku-gawa dynasty, the 
Shintd temples are sometimes of me greatest simplicity, and the 
wood employed a kind of native elm called K^aki^ is left plain, 
trusting to the grain for its effect, the only decorative work being 
the teass mounts of various kinds, including those enclosing the 
t^se of the columns employed to preserve the work when 



Chap. V. 


JAPANESE TEMPLES. 


497 


exposed to damp. The roofs of the Shintd temples are often 
thatched only, and are therefore comparatively much lighter 
than the Buddhist tiled roofs. The entrance grounds of a Shintd 
temple are usually preceded by one or more tori*i, a structure 
which consists of two circular posts carrying an upper and lower 
cross beam — the upper of double thickness and rising slightly 
at each end. The origin of these is doubtless the Indian Torana, 
though they are usually regarded now as rests for the birds, 
which frequent these temples ; like the pagodas, however, they 
were probably introduced from China, and constitute a simple 
version of the gateways of the stApas and temples in India as 
shown in Wo<^cut No. 38. 

In Japan, as in China, there appears to be no distinction 
between the temples and mortuary chapels, and the mausoleum 
of leyasu at Nikkd built on rising ground has the triple 


enclosure with three entrance gate- 
ways, and besides the main temple | ^ 

or mortuary chapel, has all the inde- 

pendent accessories such as the tori-i, j ‘ I 

pagoda, sacred stable, store-houses, iSiiiiUn ^ 

library, drum-tower, belfry, priests’ J r | ["1 1 L 

residence, etc., which forms the com- M ■p y T. [[[|| 

plement of an important Buddhist B 9 

temple, and in addition a winding T JTIP jr^ 

pathway up numerous flights of steps i 
leading to the upper mortuary chapel ; |c|— — Ji i|[ [ 

and monumental tomb. ll ^N l l 

In addition to the buildings al- ^ ^ 

ready described, the enclosures of the 
Buddhist and Shintd temples con- 
tain a number of isolated structures. 

of which in the Buddhist enclosures From Baltzer, * Architektur der 
the most important are those of the Kuiibautcn japans/ 

pagodas (Go^jO-no-td), which are 

found all over the country. In contradistinction to the Chinese 
pagodas, which are invariably octagon on plan, those in Japan, 
with one exception at Bessho, are always square. The most 
ancient example is the pagoda at H6riuji, said to have been built 
by carpenters from Korea in the then Chinese style, if so, it 
represents a type which has entirely disappeared in China ; there 
is one example with square plan at Korea, but this, following the 
Chinese custom, is built in brick. Great forests are^ said to have 
always existed in Korea, so that in the first centuries of our era 
there may have been an abundance of timber resulting in wood 
construction, the perfected type of which we see in the pagoda at 
Hdriuji (Plate LX II.) where, as in the adjoining temple, will 


VOL. II. 




498 


JAPANESE ARCHITECTURE. 


Book IX. 



be found all the features of t^ 
Japanese style such as still 
form the leading character- 
istics of the later temples and 
other structures. 

The pagoda at Hdriuji has 
five storeys, each one set back 
slightly Mow the one below. 
All have widely projecting 
eaves, carried on brackets and 
an external gallery. It is 
raised on a stone base 4 to 
5 ft. high, with terrace and 
verandah round. The crown- 
ing feature is a lofty finial 
with metal rings round, on 
which bells are hung, and 
through this finial and from 
its summit is suspended an 
immense beam. In the older 
examples the foot of this beam 
rests on the stone floor of the 
pagoda, as it does at Hdriuji, 
but in more modern examples 
there is a space left in order 
to allow of the shrink^e of 
the timbers of the several 
storeys, the object of this 
beam being to tie together 
the framing of these storeys. 
These beams are kept in posi- 
tion by framework round 
them at intervals, but are 
attached only to the finials. 
The central beam at Hdriuji 
is 100 ft. long, 3 ft. square at 
the bottom and 9 in. at the 
top. In order to support the 
timber plates carrying the 
widely projecting eaves, and 
more especially at the angles, 
flying timbers similar to the 
framing inside are carried 
down, and the ends of these 
are left as decorative features 
on which bells are suspended. 



Chap. V. 


PALACES. 


499 


Of about the same date a second pagoda exists at Hokujo near 
Nara with three storeys. At Yakushiji was erected in 6So A.D. 
a third example with three storeys, and projecting balconies with 
eaves covering the two upper storeys, which destroys the rhythm 
of the earlier exan^>les, and was fortunately not repeated in 
later structures. In the exceptional octagonal pagoda at Bessho, 
there are four stores, the only example existing. The date 
of the famous Tenno-ji five -storied pagoda at Osaka is not 
known, but the elaborate carving of the brackets and other 
constructional features with dragons and unicorns suggests a 
complete restoration, if not the actual rebuilding, of the same. 

The other temple structures in the temple grounds consist 
of the belfry {SMrif), the drum tower {Kord\ various secondary 
shrines, a dancing stage (Kagura-den), the revolving library 
(Hins/f) often constructed in the sha{w of a pagoda of two 
storeys. Priests’ rooms and monastic dwellings, the latter of 
simple construction not differing from domestic work. The 
belfry is covered with the usual type of roof with Frimoya 
gables and widely projecting eaves; it is carried by four 
columns raised on a platform about lo ft. high. It is probable 
that on account of the great weight of the bell, the platform 
was built in stone originally, which- would account for the peculiar 
concave batter of the walls, provided to withstand the earth- 
quakes, such as in the example at Kawa-saki (Plate LXIII.) near 
Tdkio. Now these platforms outside the wooden cage carrying 
the structure have an external casing of timber, which follows 
the batter of the traditional stone pedestal. This shown on 
Plate LX IV. in the leyasu temple at Nikkd and also in the 
temple enclosure at Ike-gami (Fig. 5, Woodcut Na 509). All 
the older structures in their design and construction are repeti- 
tions of temple buildings to a smaller scale with the same 
tendency in later examples to over-elaboration of ornament and 
carving. 

Palaces. 

The palaces of Japan which originally were simple, unosten- 
tatious buildings without defences have, since the military 
domination of the i6th century, been built within fortified 
enclosures surrounded by moats. The walls from 20 to 25 ft. 
high are built with a concave batter, the ma.sonry of the quoins 
dipping down in order apparently to run less risk of being over- 
thrown by earthquakes, as in the event of an upheaval the stones 
would fall back by their own weight into their original position 
(Plate LXV.), representing the walls of the inner castle at Yedo 
(T6kio), gives some idea of their construction ; the masonry of 
the main wall is either built in horizontal courses, as here shown, 



see JAPANESE ARCHITECTURE. Book IX. 

or with that generally known as polygmal masonry, in which 
blocks of irregular shape are closely fitted to one another. Towers 
built at the angles are used for military stores, and ancient 
prints show that originally stout timber palisades (Fr. hourds) 
surmounted the wall between the towers, behind which were 
frequently the soldiers' barracks as at Nagoya. The palaces, 
like the temples, are all of one storey only, the floor being 
raised from 4 to 8 ft. above the ground, and externally, in their 
design, belong to the ring type with Frimoya gables like those 
in the temples. In plan th^r consist of a numl^ of blocks put 
in communication one with the other by covered corridors, not 
arranged symmetrically like those in the Forbidden City of 
Pekin, but disposed so as to overlook gardens and small lakes. 
The principal difference externally, when compared with the 
temples, lies in the less height and much flatter pitch given to 
the roof, so much so that they are not concave in section, the 
roofs having generally one uniform slope. Although externally 
the blocks have the appearance of constituting a single hall, 
th^ are usually subdivided by sliding screens into several 
rooms; thus the residential block of the Imperial Palace at 
Kid-to, measuring about 100 ft. by 60 ft., is divided partitions 
into fourteen rooms, the centre one of which lighted only 
through the outer rooms, constituted the Mikado's sleeping 
apartment. ' The three rooms on one side of this block form a 
suite in which the floors are raised slightly one above the other, 
the further and highest room furnished with a raised dais 
indicating the position of the Imperial Throne. Access ta all 
the rooms in a subdivided block is obtained by the external 
verandah which constitutes the principal feature in all Japanese 
houses. Although in the great reception rooms the floors 
consist of polished boards, in the residential portions they are 
covered with mats (A>») about 3 in. thick, 6 ft. b^ 3 ft. in 
ordinary houses, and 7 ft. by 3 ft. 6 in. in the Imperial Palace, 
and the dimensions of each room is noted by the numbo* of 
mats covering it. In one of the blocks of the palace used for 
enjoying the cool breezes after the summer rain, the laigest of 
the four rooms into which it is subdivided has only four mats, 
and is about 14 ft by 1 1 ft. — a small room for a palace. Whilst 
the sliding screens which divide the rooms are about 7 ft. h^b, the 
rooms are about twice that height, covered with coffered ceilings 
and coves round. The decorations in the Mikado's palace 
contrast strongly with those in the temples, which are always 
ridily lacquem, painted, and gilded, whereas in the palace 
plain white wood udth gilt bronze mounts is employed, the 
e^ls bdng painted vdth flowers and other decorations by the 
great artists of Japan. The palaces of the Shdguns or mifitar>' 



Chap. V. 


DOMESTIC ARCHITECTURE. 


SOI 

Regents follow much on the same lines as those of the Mikado, 
but their construction is much more solid, and their decoration 
much bolder in character. The fortified enclosures round thm 
are increased in number, those of the castle at Kunamoto now 
destroyed, which was built by Kato Kydmasa towards the end 
of the 1 6th century, resembling somewhat the castles of 
Middle Ages with two or three outer courts and a keep within 
the inner enclosure. 

Domestic Architecture. 

If in the palaces of the Mikado and the Daimyos architecture 
is reduced to its simplest expression, in the Japanese houses it 
is non-existent, so that the aspect of the streets in the great 
cities presents a dull and monotonous appearance. The entrance 
doorway is the only external feature in which there is some 
variety, but even in the most important houses it is only a 
simplified version of those found in the more ordinary temples, 
there being similar street regulations against display as in 
China. The houses have rarely an upper storey, and the design 
consists of a square or rectangular block covered with a tiled 
roof, the interior being subdivided into rooms by sliding screens 
{fusumd) about 6 ft high. In the better houses there may 
sometimes be internal courts with buildings on all sides or all 
round. The chief feature of the Japanese house is the verandah 
which faces the gardens, and serves as a passage to all the 
rooms. The floor of the house is raised about lo in. above 
the ground, there being no basement of any kind, and the 
importance of the room depends on the number of mats which 
cover the floor; those mats measure 6 ft. by 3 ft. each. In 
a middle><lass dwelling the chief reception room may have 
fifteen or sixteen mats, the smaller rooms four to eight or ten ; 
by pushing aside the screens the whole house can be thrown 
into one room, and, as a rule, the side facing the south is thrown 
open during the day to ventilate the*house. The design of the 
verandahs is of the greatest simplicity, with none of the elabora- 
tion found in China, and the decoration of the interior is 
confined to the upper part of the walls above the screens. In 
the chief reception room is always a recess or alcove in which 
hanging pictures known as kakemonos are suspended, but 
never more than three in number, and a vase of .flowers. The 
treasures of the house are always stored away in a fireproof 
storehouse made witii walls of mud or clay, and known as a 
godowH, 

It is not yet possible to foresee what the throwing open of 
Japan is likely to evolve in the development of their dvtl and 



503 JAPANESE ARCHITECTURE Book IX. 

domestic architecture. Their temples, whether Buddhist or 
Shintd, 'with the numerous other structures in the sacred 
enclosures, will probably still be built in the old timber style 
as being most in conformity with their customs and religious 
rites, but already within the last thirty years a large number 
of buildings, such as palaces, colics, hospitals, Mnks, and 
other commercial structures, as also a few private houses, have 
been erected in brick or stone which are more or less coides 
of rimilar work in Europe and the United States. In their 
mansions and private houses the Japanese dress, still worn 
throughout the country, requires that the living rooms should 
be in accordance with native customs, and this has led to a 
compromise, whereby in the larger mansions a wing has been 
addra in which the reception rooms are all built in what is 
known as the "Western style." Hitherto in their domestic 
buildings extreme simplicity and an avoidance of ostentation 
has always been the rule, extending even to the royal palaces, 
so that no evolutions of architectural style may be expected 
in that direction. In their civil work this rule has not been 
observed, if we may judm Ity the few representations which 
have been published. If, however, the new steel skeleton 
Structures which, starting in the United States, have now been 
generally adopted in European towns, are found to be capable 
of resisting the shocks of earthquakes, their employment in 
Japan might lead to a new development of architectural style, 
seeing that, in another branch of construction, that of carpentry, 
the workers occupy a very high position. 



INDEX 


AbhatadAna pafoda, near Fagfln, 
Burma, ii. 343, 353 

Abhayagiri figaba, AnurAdhapnni, i. 
227, 229, 333-333 

I Tisia, Sinhaleie king (a.d. 390- 
335 im/# 

Mount, JaiM templei on, i. 313, 
of Vimala, 30; 

dynasty of Bij&pAr, ii. 189, 


Abbayal 
!)• i. 

. Mo , 

315, iL 5, ^ ; Temple ol 
Tenmle of TejahpAla, 40 
idil Snflhi dynasty of Biji 


Adil 

368f. 

Adtnah mosque, Gaur, ii. 357-359 
Adiiwar temple, ^atmnjapi, ii. 37f. 
Afghanistan, topes in, 1. 84 ; Caves, 139 
A«a, ii. 387 ; Red Palace or Jahingtr 
jllahall, 393f, 308 ; l*timadu-d-daulah’s 
tonb, ^5; Tiy Mahall, 313-317; Mott 
Masiid, 317 

Ahalyi B8rt gbAt at Maheiwar, ii. 183 
Ahin-posh stOpa, i. 89-90, 93 
AbmadAbAd : Jaina temme of 5eth 
Hatfatsingh at, plan, ii. 04 ; view, 65 ; 
Style and character of the architecture, 
190, 333, 330; JAmP Masjid, 
330 ; Queen’s mosque. 333 ; Sarkhei 
mosque, 333; MunAm KbAn’s ana 
Rilnt Stprt’s, 336 ; Sidi Sayyid’s, 337 ; 
Tombs, 338 

Ahmadnanr style, ii. 190 
Aihole, old temple at, i. 319 ; plan, 330 ; 
view, 331 s Meguti Jaina temple, 356, 
ii. 30 ; Jaina cave, 18 ; ^aiva cave, 

119 

AjantA, rock-cut Tee (or Hit) at, i. 70 ; 
Chaitya Cave No. 10, 148; ^ew of 
the interior, 149 ; cross section, 149 ; 
Cave 9, 150; Cave 19, 150; plan, 

f ; view of facade, 153; Rock-cut 
ba, 153; PilUra, 154, 192, 194- 
308; Caves at, 179-181 ; VihAras, 
197 ; Paintings, 1969 315 ; Chaityas, 
. ii- 121 

Ajtvikasect, i. 130, 133 ; Caves, 176, 177 
Ajmlr, mosque at, ii. 68, 310-314, 341 ; 

plan, 311, 313 ; great arch, 313 
Ajmtigadh, ii. 91 

Akbar, Emperor (a.d. 1556-1605), ii. 95t 
165, 167, 173, 176, 323 ; architectural 
glories of, 288-302; His tomb at 


Sikandara, 298; plan, 399; section, 
300 ; view, 301 

Alexander the Great, pillars ascribed to, 

i. 61 ; Invasion of India, 86, 109, B. 
186 

*A1A1 DarwAsa, Old Delhi, ii. aoi, aio; 
MinAr, 30i, 306 

’AlAu-d-DIn’s tomb and buildinn, ii. 301 
’Alt Mariid, stApas at, i. 93, 210 
AllahAbra, lAt or pillar at, i. 57; Hall 
in palace at, ii. 8^ 

Altaic, empwor, ii. 196 ; Tomb, 307, 

309 

AlwAr, tomb of RAja BakbtAwar Sin^, 

ii. 168 

Amaittka, i. 333, 333 fts/#, ii. 75, no, 
138, 140, 150; AmalaHid, i. 333, ii. 
114, 139, 136, 147, 159 
Amarakantak, iL 01 

AmarAvall, stApa, L 33, 34, 36, 59, 80-83, 
103, 186; Kail at, 113, 119-123, 164, 
331 ; DAgaba, 133; Date, 133 ; Ah, 
223 , ii. 103; Dbinvakataka, i. 294 
and ffslir ; ii. 127, 358 
AmbA cave-temple, h. 131 mtt 

, a Devt and a Yak&nt, ii. a8 

AmbwmAth temple, iL 147 
AmbasthAla dA|^ba, ’Ceylon, i. 338 
AmbAr, palace at, iL 176 
Amoy, p*ai-lu at, ii. 47$ 

Amritsar, Golden Temple at, iL 161 i 
bistoiy, 16a 

Amravarman, Lididihavi king, I. 376 
AmwA, HindA temple, ii. 57 ; view, 56 
Ananda, statue of, i. 344 and Msf# 
^temge at^PagAn, ii. 351, 352-354* 

Aiu^, cave,\chandagiri, L 178, iL 15 ; 

Serpent, 349. 

Anma temple, 1. 320 
Andher, stApas or topes at» I 71 
Andhra dynsty, L 8, 21-33, 24 
Angkor Aom, old capital of Cambodia 
(founded a.d. 812), ii. 


380 ; Palaces and public buildings, 393, 
394* 396, 399-401. 

VAt, temple, 11. 374-376* 377. 380- 

393; Plan, m ; Elevation, 38s; views, 
384. 385. 387.389; 400,402 


503 



504 


INDEX. 


Animals on pillar bases, i. 215 
' Ankai, J[aina caves at, ii. 19 
AnniMri, Jaina temples at, ii. 23 
Anaridhapuia, ancient capital of Ceylon, 
i. 228 ; present state or the city, 228- 
229; Topes or DAgabas, etc., 229- 
242 ; The sacred Bo-tree MahA-Vihilra, 
243; Great Brazen Monastery, 238- 
239; pillars, 239 
Arab invasion, ii. 186-187 
Arakan pagoda, near Mandalay, ii. 352 
Arch, objection of Hindds to, i. 310; 
Indian examples, 311 ; In Burma, ii. 
3S|. 354, 357. Gateways. 
Architecture, Buddhist, i. U ; Stambhas 
or lAts, 56-61 ; Stdpas, 62-66 ; Topes, 
66 - 101 ; Rails, 102 - 124 ; Chaitya 
halls, caves, 125-169; Vih8ra caves 
or monasteries, 170 - 207 ; Gandhdra 
monasteries, 209-223; Ceylon, 224- 
250 

, Chalukyan, i. 420 ; temples, 423- 

450 

— — China, ii. 446-485 ; Japan, 486- 
502 

— — , Civil; Dravidian, i. 411-419; 

Northern or Indo-Ai^an, ii. 164-105 
— , domestic : in China, ii. 476-482 
— , Dravidian, i. 302; Hindd con- 
struction: arches, 310; domes and 
roofing, 312; plans, 319; iikharas, 

S 2; Rock* cut temples, 327-349; 

fimallapuram raths, 327-339; Kailis, 
Elilri, 342-346; Temples, 350-410; 
Palaces, 4>1-419 

, Further India: Burma, ii. 339- 

370 ; Cambodia, 371-403 ; Siam, 404- 




Kashmiri temples, 255-272 ; in Ne^l, 
273-286; Wooden temples, 286-288, 
ii: 333-335; in Tibet and Sikhim, 
290-20 

— , Indian Saracenic, ii. 186 ; 


Ghazni, 191^95 ; Pathfin, 10 ; Delhi, 
198-210; ^mlr, 210-214; later Pathfin, 
214-221 ; Jaunj^r, 222-228; Gujarfit, 
229-245; M&lw&, 246- 2C2; Bengal, 
253-261 ; Kulbarg^, 262-267 ; Bijfipr, 
208-279; Sindh, 280-282; Mughal, 

.83-M5S Wooden, 333-3JS .. „ 

— — , Indo-Aryan or Northern, 11. 84: 
Temples, 89-116; Brahmanical rock- 
cut temples, 117-131; temples in 
Central and Northern India, 132-163; 
Cenotaphs, palaces, ghdts and dams, 
164-185 

— ^ Jaina, ii. 3-83; Ardies, L 311- 
313; domes and roofing, 313-316; 
plansb 319-322; Caves, ii. 9-22; 
Noribem temples, 24-57 ; To^rs, 57- 
61 ; Modem temples, 62 - 68 ; con- 


verted to mosques, 68; Soathem 
Indian temples, 23, 24, 70-81 ; Colossal 
statues, 71; Bastis, 74; Tombs, 79; 
Stambha^ 80 

Ardhandrtra, form of 5iva, i. 42 
Aijuna’s rath at Mflmallapuram, i. 331 ; 

* Penance ’ sculpture, 341 
Aijuna temple (Chandi), Java, ii. 432 
Airans or Aryas, their migration into 
India and position, i. 9-15, 28 ; The 
dominant race befpre the rise of 
^ Buddhism, 47, 53 ; Aiy&varta, 85, 87 
As8m monoliths, i. 288, 289 
Axoka, Emperor (b.c. 263-226), patron 
of Buddhism, i. 19; his edicts, 32, 
33, 56, ii. 31; his connection with 
Indian architecture, i. 31, 56, 59 ; 
his connection with SAnchi, 67, 68, 75, 
77,86, 102, 109. 117, 129, 130, 132, 
133, 148 : his missionaries to C^lon, 
243 ; to Nepil, 270, 275 ; chaityas in 
NepAl, 277; lAts, i. 56-59, ii. 82; 
missionaries to Burma, 357, 391 
A tala Masjid, Jaunpur, ii. 226 
Athara NalA bridge, Orissa, ii. 113 
AurangAbAd Buddhist caves, i. 203, 205 ; 

Tomb of Rabi^ DaurAni, ii. 190, 322 . 
Aurangzlb or ’Alamgtr, ii. 187, 269; 
his buildinj^s, 3M-323; destroyed 
IlindA shrines at Benares and MathurA, 
321 ; Mosque at LAhor, 321 ; bis wife’s 
tomb, and his own, 322 
Austin or Augustin de Bordeaux, ii. 
306 na/e 

AvadaiyAr K6vil, cornice at, i. 30 
Avalokiteivara,- figure at Kanheri, i. 200 
Avantipur, temples at, i. 264 ; fragment 
of pillar at, 263 
AyoanyA, i. ^ 16, it 405 
AyuthiA or DwAravatt, old capital of 
Siam, ii. 404, 405, 409 


Babar, Mughal emperor, i. 219, ii. 

I75» 176, 197 ; his works, 285 
Babylonia, architectural synonyms in 
Burma, ii. 365, 369 

BAdAmi, BijApAr district: Brahmanical 
caves at, i. 34, 306,421, ii. 120-125; 
plan and section, 127, 128 ; sculptures, 
1. 340 ; MAlegitti temple, 356 ; Jaina 
cave, ii. 9, 18, 73 

BAgh, caves at, i. 129 ; Great VihAra, 182, 
197-199, ii. 19 ; plan, i. 10 ; Point- 
ings, 10 

Bahmanl dynasty, style of, ii. 189 
BahulArA temple, near BAukurA, i. 15 
BaijnAth or KiragrAma temples, i. 97-301 
BakariyA kund buildings, li. 87-88, 216^ 
227 

Bakheng pyramidal temple, south of 
Angkor Tbom, ii. 399 



INDEX. 


505 


Daktria, kingdom of, i. 29, 37, 52, 86, 
209, 223 

Balagimve or Balagfimi in Mysore: 

sUmbha, i. 348 ; temples, 441*44^ 
Banavftsi, or Vanavftsi, 1. 19, 303 noti 
Bands or Dams, ii. 183 
Bangkok, Great Tower, ii. 410, 411; 

Hall of Audience, 41 x, 412 
Bftnkurft, Hindd tem^e near, i. 15. 
Bftnteal Kedei temple, Cambodia, ii. 

„ 37 S. 396. 397 „ „ 

Baolts or step- wells, 11. 183, 239 
Bapuon, temple in Angkor Thom, ii. 
«. 375 . 37 «. 3 ^ i 

B8rftbar, near Ga^, caves at, 1. 130, 176 
Bari-Dewal or Vimdna, ii. 93, 99, 109 
B&rftmdla, temple at, i. 262 
B8rb8ti fort destroyed, ii. 95 
Bardisanes, L 42 

Barxkot Tope (Uttarasena Stdpa), i. 93 
Baroli, temples at, ii. 133; view and 
plan, 134 ; ornamented pillar, 135 
Bassak temple, ii. 197, 398, 400 
Bastian, Dr. Adolpn, Cambodian explora- 
tions of, iL 372 

Bastts or Basams, Taina temples, ii. 71, 74 
Batw8, tomb at, ii. 240 
Baubangyl-payi, pagoda at Prome, ii. 342, 
360 

Bayley, £. C., sculptores brought from 
Jamilgarlit, i. 209 

Bayon temple in Angkor Thom, ii. 374, 
376, 379 . 380. 392-394 5 pkm, 393 ; 
tower, 394 ; 396,398-400 

B8b£ temple at Prome, ii. 3^, 356 
Bedsft, cnaityacave, i. i-38; plan, 138: 
and capital of pillar, 139 ; view on 
verandah, 140, 168; Vihte, 179. 186 
Begam Kothl, Lucknow, iL 326 ; view, 

in Mysore, great temple at, L 
4 * 8 . 437 i 439 S pl«w. 439 ? view ^ 
porch, 440 ; view of pavilion, 441 ; 11. 
128 

Benares, view and diagram 01 teiUples at, 
ii. 90, 152 ; Visverwar temple at, 151, 
> 53 . 32> ; View of balcony at the 
observatoi^, 178; Ghuslt Ghftt, 181, 
182 

Bengal : Caves, i. 175 ; lU architecture 
and local individuaiity of its style, ii. 
189, 233; Form of roofing, 159, 169; 
example, 161 ; type, 254 
Beng M8ale8 temple, ii. 377 . 380, 394 - 
396; plan, 395; view, 396; 400 
B^nagar caves, 1. 129 
Bessho, Japan, octa^nal pagoda at, ii. 

Mcred places of the Jains, 

ii. 71 

Bhftja,c!iaitjacave : plan,L i^; fin^ade, 
135; Emblems in, 136; Digsba, 137, 


148, 213 ; Small early cave at, 177 ; 
Capital, 178, 196 ; 178, 180 

Bhagavat Gttft, L 221 
Bhamti or dose corn^, ti. 30^ 43, 47 
Bhanpurh temples, ii. 55 
Bhamyftr or Buiwr ten^e, near Nau- 
shahra, L 266 ; view of 00^ 266 
Bharatpur Rkja’s cenotaph, iL 169 
Bharaut, stCipa, L ao, 36 ; Rail at, 7, lol- 
lop, 113, 117, 119, 123; Round temple 
and part id a palace, 158, 
Sculptures, 36, 52 222, 336 

square and oblong cells frmn a relief at, 
173 ; Torana, 259iMrs, U. 136, 426, 444 
Bhar^, mosque at, iL 241 
Bhatg&on, NepAl : i. 273, 276 r BhawAnt 
temple at, 280 ; Palm doorway, 282, 
285 ; ii. 483 

BhAttiprolu stAjn, L 34, 83 
Bhaumajo or numaxa cave, L 268, 272 
not$ 

Bhikshugrihas, monks’ cells, ii. 9 
BhilsA topes, i. 66-68 
Bhtma’sMth, MAmallapuram, L 331, 33a 
Bhtma temple (Chandi) on Dieng flateau, 
J 4 va, ii. 431, 43a, 441 
Bhlmakerava temple, i. 268 mote 
Bhtfnejvara temple, Mukhalinga, iL x 14 
Bhoga-mandir, refectory, ii. 93, 99, 109 
Bhojpur, topes at, i. 71 
Bhuteia temples at WAniyat, i. 267 
Bhuvanerwar temple, i. 325, ii. 92$ 
Great or LingarAjs tenwle at, 99; 
plan, 99 ; view of, too ; Great Tower, 
102 ; RAjarAnt, temple at, 103 ; door- 
way in, 104; Principal temples, Xi6, 
XX7, 119 

Btdar, B^manl capital, ii. 189, 266; 

buildings at, 267 
BihAr dives, L 13^133 
Biianagar. See Vijayanagar 
BiJApAr, ii. 189, 190; its architecture, 
268 ; JAmi’ Masiid at, 2te 1 plan, 270 ; 
sections, 27 X ; Tomb of Ibfantm, 272 ; 
Of Muhammad, 273 ; pendentives, 274 ; 
section, 275 ; Audienoe Hall, 278 ; 
Mihtart Maball, 278, 279 
Bimeran, tope at, i. ox 
Bintenne, relic and dAgaba, i. 63 
Birs Nimrfid, iL 365 
Btr-Singh-deva BnndelA, iL 175, 321 
Blitar, tomb at, JAva, iL 442 
Bodh-GayA temple, rail at, L 20, 36, 
102-X04, io 9 » 113 . >17. X18, 250; 
Burmese inscriptions, 77; Bas-relief 
from, 134; Temple or StApa, 76 ^ 79 . 
170, 295, 322, 325, u. 119, 353 note. 
362 note. 364 ; Sacred tree, L 243 
Bodhi-tree, L 77, 109 ; in Ceylon, X03, 
220. 220. 242-242 

lat, iL 436k 4.8.441 
Bodhnith temple, Nepll, L 378, 379 



So6 


INDEX. 


Boro-Bttdur, JAva, ii. 374, 383, 386, 
391, 4*6, 417; erection, 420, 422; 
plan, elevation, and section, 423 ; 
sections of domes, 424 ; view of central 
entrance and stairs, 429 
Bot, in Siam, the temple proper, ii. 406, 

407, 409 

Bracket construction in China and Japan, 
ii. 454, 495 

Brahmft faces on Cambodian temples, 
ii- 378* 392 f 397 . 398 , 401, 408 
Brfthman caste, i. 1 1 
Bi^hmanical rock-temples, ii. 120 
Brahmanism, i. 308 

Brindfiban, ii. 1 55 ; plan of Govinda- 
deva temple at, ij6; view, 157; 
balcony in temple, 158; Plan of temple 
of Jugal Kishor at, 158, 176 
Buchhanapalli temple, i. 435 ; view of, 

Buc^ha, i. 9 ; period of his life, 16, 17 ; 
previous Buadhas, 41 ; apportionment 
of his remains, 62-64; Relic at Bintenne, 
63, 64 ; Im^s of, 221, 222 ; Foot- 
prints, 223 ; Colossal figures of, 245 and 
fiote, 26311^//, 272 note ; Nirvina figures, 
248; his tooth, its sanctity, shrines, 
and migrations, 63, 64 ; his begging 
pot, 64, 65 ; Rcjics at Rangoon, 63, 
li. 347 ; Previous Buddhas, 1. 41, 63, 
»• 347 

Buddhaghosha, tnonk, i. 162 
Buddhavarsha era, or of the religion, ii. 


Buc^hism, its founder, i. 16, 17 ; its 
history, 17-20; missions, 19, 41, 52, 
> 1 * 357 9 Southern India, 307 ; in 
Cambodia, li. 375 

Buddhist architecture, earliest traceable 
date, i. 51 ; style, 53 ; monuments in 
Southern India, 32 ; Classification, 54 ; 
. rail patterns, 136, 146; Buddhist rail 
in Ceylon, 242 ; Monasteries in Tibet, 
293; Vihfhra at Dambal, 431, 432; 
Temples in China, ii. 461-464 ; Monas- 
tery in P^n, 462. See Architecture 
BukhArfl, ii. 187, 196 
Bfimasu temple, Kashmir, i. 268, 272 note 
Bundi palace, ii. 173 
Buniflr or Bhaniyfir temple, i. 266 
Bu-pay8, pagoda at Pagftn, ii. 341 
Burma, architecture in, ii. 339 ; Chaityas 
and circular jMgodas, ; Square 
temples, 352 ; Thatdn or ThahtOn, 357 ; 
Prome, 359; Pagin, 360; Monasteries, 
365-369 

'Byiantme domes, i. 316 


Cambay or Kambhftt, J&mi* Masjid and 
topab at, ii. 241 

C4Kmbodia (ancient Xambuja), relations 
with Ceylon, i. 246 { Architecture in. 


ii. 371 ; French, German and English 
researches in, 372 ; traditions, immi- 
grants, history, 373 - 375 ; Temples, 
376; temple of Angkor V&t, 380; 
temple of Bayon, 392 ; temple of Beng 
M^alefl, 394; other temples, 396; 
Pyramid temples, 398; palaces, 399; 
Civil architecture, 401 ; Causeways, 402 ; 
remarkable evidences of mechanical 
skill and civilisation, 402, 403 
Canton, P*ai-lu near, ii. 473 

river, * Second Bar Pagoda’ on 

the, ii. 470 

Capitals and columns, Tirhut and Sankisa, 

i. 58; Kirl£, 60; Bedsi, 139; Kan- 
heri, 164; Bh&jd, 178; Msik, 188; 
Pitn8, 207 ; Ajanti, 208 ; Jamftlgarhl, 
214; Perso-Indian, 215; Anurldha- 
pura, 235, 236 ; Kashmir, 257 ; Hindu- 
Corinthian, 299 ; Gupta, 301 

Caves, i. 20, 125 ; numbers, 128 ; geo- 
graphical distribution, 129; Ajantfi, 
148, 154, 180; B&d&mi, ii. 121, X27 ; 
Bdgh, i. 182, 197; Bflr&bar, 130; 
Bedsd, 138; Bengal, 175-177 ; BMr, 
130; BhijS, 134-137; Dhamntr, 164, 
179, 200; Emrfl, 159, 201, 342, ii. 
19, 120; Guntupalle, i. 128, 155, i&f ; 
JunSgadh, 181, ii. 31 ; Junnar, 155, 
168; Kalugumalai, 22; Kanheri, i. 
162, 176, 182; Karhftd, ii. 124; 
K.^rle, i. 142, 161 ; Kholvi, 129, 166, 
200; KondinS, 134, 148, 179; Kon- 
divte, 131, 199; Orissa, ii. 9; Pital- 
khora, i. 134, 137, 148, 169; Sfln&and 
Talijt, 179; Mc^e of ornamentation, 
170 

Cenotaphs, ii. 16^-169 
Ceylon, Buddhist relics in, i. 63 ; 
Chronology, 224; Its ancient archi- 
tecture, 226-250. See Anur8dhapura 
Chaityas, i. 55 ; Chaitya halls, Buddhist 
temples, 124-129; at S8nchi, 126; at 
Ter, 126 ; at Cheearla, 127 ; windows, 
216, 217; Nepftl, 277; Burma, ii. 
341. See Caves 

ChaityAngana or pradakshina^ i. 295 
Chakdarra, Stfipa at, i. 93, 217 note 
Chakpat stfipa, 1. 91, 92, 97 
Chtlis SitOn at AlUh&bftd, ii. 298 
Chalukya, Western dynasty, i. 26, 27, 
architecture, 420-450; kingdom, 

ii. 22. See Architecture ' 

Chambft, wooden temples in, i. 286, 287 
Ch&mp8ntr Jftmi’ Masjid, ii. 242 
Champ&dexa, Annum, ii. 373 note 
Champds of Cochin China, 11. 375 
Chandragiri palace, i. 417, 418 
Chandragupta Maurya (B.C. 320-286), 
Sandr&ottos of the Greeks, i. 8, 18, 
109 

Chandragupta I. {cir, a.d. 320), i. 23 



INDEX. 


SOI 


Chandragupta II. {cir, a.d. 412), i* 23, 
24, ii. 208 

Chandrftvati in Gujar&t, pillars at, ii. 43 ; 
near Jhilr&pathan, temple or porch 
at, 132 ; Plan, 133 ; 140 
Chaultrls or Chawadts, i. 309; Tirumal 
Ndyyak’s, 386 

Chaumukh pillars, i. 347, ii. 21, 28; 

Temples at PRlitEn^, 28, 61 
Chaurdsi Gumbaj, tomb at Kalpi, ii. 
219 noti 

Chausath Jogint temples at Khajurdho, 
ii. 51, 141 ; at Rdntpur Jharidl, 51 
Cheras of Kerala, i. 32, 34, 303, 305-306 
Chergdon, wooden temple at, i. 287 
Chezarla, Buddhist structural chaitya, i. 

34. 127, 128, 319, 336 
Chhattlsgarh, province, ii. 91 
Chhattras, i. 66, 278 ; chhatris or ceno- 
taphs, ii. 164, 165 
Chhattrdvalt, i. 279 

Chidambaram or Chillaml>aram, temple 
at, i. 307, 373 ; plan, 375 ; Porch of 
hall, 376 ; section of porch, 377 ; View 
of ruined temple, 378, 388 
China, deficiency of information, ii. 446 ; 
divergence between its people and the 
Egyptians, 447 ; causes of the absence 
ofcertain classes of buildings, 448-450; 
development of Chinese buildings, 451 ; 
Roofs, 452 - 454 ; Trimoya roofs, 455 ; 
materials employed, 456; Temple of 
the Great Dragon, 459 ; Buddhist 
temples, 461 ; Tombs, 465 ; T’ais or 
Pagoda towers, 468 ; P*ai-lus, 472 ; 
Palaces, and domestic architecture, 
476-485 

Chitor or Chitorcadh, 5 r! AUata or 
Khaitan Rdnt’s Jaina tower, ii. 57 ’ 59 » 
Kumbha Rdnd*s Jayastambha, 59*60 ; 
buildings, 88, 165 ; Mird-Bdl’s temple, 
150-151; Palace of the Mori or of 
lUtnasingh, 170; of Kumbha Rdnd, 
171 ; of Shima and Padmint, 172 
Chodaganga of the Ganga dynasty, ii. 
9S» 108 

Chok Gargyar (now Kohker), temporary 
capital of Cambodia, ii. 375 
Chola kings, i. 27, 32, 34 ; dynasty and 
kingdom, 304-307 

Chorten, Tibetan dflgaba, i. 290 no/e, ii. 

463 

Chronology of India, i. 9 fio/e ; of Ceylon, 

**4 , .. 

Chdl&mani or Tsdldmani pagoda, 11. 3541 

363 

Circular relic shrines in Ceylon, i. 247 
and no/o 

Civil Architecture: Dravidian, i. 411- 
419; North Indian, ii. 164-185 ; Cam- 
bodian, 401 ; Chinese, 476 ; Japanese, 
501 


Colombo, Hindu temple at, i. 339-340 
Colossal statues, Budohist, i. 245 ne/e, 263 
note, 272 Mo/e ; Jaina, ii. 49, 55, 72 mote 
Confucius, temples of, ii. 456 
Conjivaram or Kdnchtpuram, Pallava 
capital, i. Temples at, 357; 

Vaikuntha Peramdl temple, 359 ; 
Ekdmrandtha temple and gopuram, 
360, 374 Varaoardjatwdmi temple, 
360 ; Kdmdkshi temple, 361 
Converted temples, ii. 68 
Corinthian capitals from Gandhdra, i. 

214, 215, 217, 258 
Cosmas Indikopleustes, i. 31 
Councils, Buddnist, i. 17, 19, 22, 68, 87, 
ii. 359 and no/e 

Court, M. Topes opened by, i. 92, 94 
Cowie, Rev. A., Kashmirian explorations, 
i. 252 

Crystal palace, Sydenham, Major Gill's 
copies of Indian frescoes, i. 196 note ; 
Sculptures, 210 

Cunningham, Gen. Sir A., Eastern 
Archreological PJxplorations of, i. 58, 
e/ seqq. 

Dacca, a capital of Jahdngir, ii. 304 
Ddgabas, i. 54, 65 ; Amardvatt, 122 ; 
Hock-cut at Bhdjd, 137 ; KIrld, 145 ; 
Ajantd, 153 ; Anurddhapura, 229-241 ; 
Circular of Burma, ii. 341 ; Bu-payd 
at Pagdn, and others, 341 ; Kaung 
Hmaudau, 345 ; Shwe-Ifmaudau, 346 ; 
Rangoon, 348 ; Sinbyume at MingOn, 
349 ; Mingfln-payd, 351 
Dakhan monastery of Fab Hian and 
Pliuen Tsiang, i. 171, 241, 408-409 
Daladd Mdligawd, or Tooth relic shrines, 

i. 235, 241 note, 247 note ; misnamed, 
248 

Dalai Ldma, worship paid to, i. 292, 293 
Dambal temple of Dodda Btuavanna, i. 
43 * 

Dambulla rock-temples, i. 248 
Dams or Bands, ii. 183-185 
Ddrantd, Jaldldbdd. topes at, i. 89, 90 
Darya Daulat pavilion at Seringapatam, 

ii. 323 ... 

Dasaratha, inscriptions of king, 1. 132 
Das Avatdra, Plindd cave, ElOrd, il 
121-124 

Dastdr Dtndr, ii. 268 
Dasyus, abormines of Northern India, 
their civilization, i. 13-15, 17, ii. 85 
Datiyd palace, ii. 173 
Daufat^r stdpa, Sindh, i. 100 
Delhi, JJit at, i. 56 ; Jaina temple, ii. 
^-67; Palace of Shdh Jahdn, 

312; Jdmi’ Masjid, 318-319; Mo 
pavilion, 32S 

, Old, moMjue, ii. 197; section, 

ardies, and nundr of the Qutb, 202- 



INDEX. 


508 


Delhif Old — (cMtinuid ) — 

210; Iron ^llar, 207 ; Interior of tomb, 
209 ; view of tomb, 217 ; Pendentive 
from mosque, 220 
Depung monasteiy, Tibet, i. 294 
Devftnampiya Tissa, Sinhalese king (n.c. 

247-207), i. 63, 224 note, 235, 238 
Dhamek stfipa at Sdrn&th, i. 71-75 
Dhammayangyt temple at Pagan, ii. 
361-362 

Dhammayazika pagoda, ii. 342 note 
Dhamnir, caves at, i. 164-166, 179, 200, 
204, ii. 21 ; rock -temple at, 129-130 
Dh&nyakataka, early Andhra capital, i. 
22,2^ 

Dhfir, Jami’ Masjid, ii. 201, 246 ; Iron 
pillar at the Lit Masjid, 247 
Dnirisinva, Jaina caves at, i. 182, ii. 19 
Dharmachakra, * Wheel of the Law,’ i. 75 
Dharmadhitu-Mandala, i. 280 
Dharmarija, rath at Mimallapuram, i. 
*72. 332-335 

Dharmarila at Mandi, ii. 250 
Dhirwir, temples, i. 352-3^7, 424 » »• 
92, 117; Dtpdins, i. 347 
Dholki mosques, ii. 243 
Dhundiya, Jaina sect, ii. 27 ttoie 
Dhwajastambhas at Kailis, i. 346-348 
Dhyini, Buddhas, i. 230 and note^ 245, 
277. 279, ii. 436 

Dieng plateau in Java, group of temples 
on, ii. 417. 430 : 433 . 44 * 

Dig, garden palace at, ii. 169, 178 ; Hall, 
179: View from central pavilion, 180 
Digambara Jains, ii. 3, 4, 7 ; Caves, 21 
Diguva Ahobalam, unfinished mantapam 
at, i. 404 

Dikpilas, sculptures of, i. 428 
Dtmipur, monoliths at, i. 288, 289 
Dipawansa, Sinhalese chronicle, i. 7, 8, 

224 

Dtpdin pillars, at Dhirwir, i. 347-348 ; 

in South India, ii. 81 
Domes, Hindi), i. 312-319, ii. 56, 135; 
Indian Saracenic, 271 ; constructive 
diagram, 276 ; Boro-Budur, 424 
Domestic architecture : Chinese, ii. 476; 
Japanese, 501 

Don-Thal or Dukhya-garh, a Buddhist 
vihira, Elilri, i. 203 

Doorways, i. 428; sloping jambs, 217 
Mte ; Nepil, 282 ; Hanamkonda 
temple, 423 ; Bhuvanerwar, ii. 104 ; 
Fathpur-Sikrt mosoue, 297 
Doric pillars, in Kashmir, i. 256-258, ii. 
129 

Draupadt rath, MUmallauurani, i. 330 
Dr&vida-dem, i. 303, ii. 84 
Dravida-Munda race, i. 46 
Dravidian people, i. 12, 28, 31-33, 42i 
45 - 49 . 52 : Style, its extent, ; 
historical notice, 303-307; Beligtons, 


307; Rock-temples, 327; Temples, 
350-410; Civil architecture, 411-419; 
Dravidian and Indo-Aryan temj^es, 
ii. 89 

Dubika^ ii. 357 

Dukkantein temple, Mrohaung, ii. 354 
Dumar Lend, Elilri rock-cut temple, ii. 

124, 127 ; Plan, 128 
Durgd, goddess, i. 42 ; in Nep^l, 277 
Duttha^mini, Sinhalese king (b.c. 100- 
77), i. 63, 224, 230, 238, 243 note 

EklAkhi Masjid at Gaur, ii. 259 
Eklinga temples, ii. 148 
El&la Sohona mound, Anuridhapura, i. 
229 

Eldpura temple (ElCira), excavated by 
Krishna I., K&shtrakilta, i. 348 
Elephants cave-temple, ii. 124, 127-129 
Elliot, Sir Walter, i. 207 note 
Eliiri, Buddhist caves at, i. 159; Vlrva- 
karma cave, 159; Vihdras, 201-205; 
Kailas, 303, 342-346 ; Jaina caves, ii. 
19-24; Brahmanical caves, 120-124; 
Dumar Leni cave, 127, 128 
Epigraphy, i. 8,9 ; ‘ Epigraphia Camatica,’ 
33 note 

Eran, boar at, i. 24; Lit, 60; pillars, 301, 
348 ; Remains at, ii. 132 
Etruscan tombs, i. 312, ii. 465 
Eutopean tombs at Lucknow and Sural, 

i. 330 

Facades, Bihar, i. 131, 135 ; Burma, 

Fah Ilian, Chinese pilgrim, i. 23,* 80, 
222, 227, 239, 241, 242, ii. 373. 39*. 4*9 
Faihpur-Sikri, ii. 177 . *90, 293 ; carved 
pillars in, 294 ; IVIosque at, 295, 320 ; 
southern gateway, 29>6 
Firozdbdd, ruins of, ii. 198 
Firoz Shfih, lat re-erected by, i. 56 
Foucher, ^I. Alf., Mission of, to report on 
Buddhist remains, i. 89 and note^ 93, 
210 notCy 213, 223 

Garlets on stupas, i. 216, 258 
Gad.'ig temples, 1. 427 
Gajabahu 1., Sinhalese king (A.n. 173- 
185), i. 230 

Galaganath temple in Dhdrwar, i. 432, 

ii. 89 

Galpota or stone book, Polonnaruwa, i. 

246,247 ^ a . 

Gal X'ihdra sculptures, Ceylon, 1. 244, 248 
(vdndan Monastery, Tibet, i. 294 
Gandhakuti temple, i. 75 
Gandhdra art, i. 37 note ; Topes, 84-89 ; 
Monasteries, 209-223; Sculptures, 209- 
211, 21S; gablets, 2161 258; inscrip- 
tions, 221, 257 ; Vihara roofs, 269 : 

ii. 4x5. 425. 427 



INDEX. 


5^9 


Ganeia caves at Junnar, i. 159 and na/e 
— ~ cave, Udayagiri, ii. 12-15 » pillar 
in, 13 ; sculpture, 14 

rath, Mimallapuram, i. 333, 337 

Ganges, the, and its Gh&ts, ii. 181 
Garuda, winged bearer of Vishnu, i. 282, 
ii. Ill, 409, 443 

Gate-pyramid or Gopuram, at Kumba- 
konam, i. 395 

Gateways and Torans, i. 114; Sinchi, 
115; Viiayanagar, 311 ; Jhinjhuw&d&, 
312 ; Worangal,. 434 ; Vadnagar, ii. 
136; N8gd8, 149; Jaunpur, 224; 
Fathpur-Stkrt, 296 ; Pekin, 462, 474 ; 
Japan, 492, 497 

Gaudama or Gautama, the Buddha, i. 

63. ii- 347 ; image, 352 
Gaudaupalin temple at Pag^n, ii. 363, 364 
Gauhati, ruins of, i. 290 
Gaur, ii. 189, 223, 253 ; peculiar form 
of roof in, 253, 254 ; Mosques, 256 ; 
their defects, 259 ; Mindr, 259 ; Gate- 
ways, 260 

Gautamiputra 54 takarni, Andhra king 
(«>. A.D. 125), i. 22, 30, 1 13, 185 

cave, Nfisik, rail at, i. 113; cave, 

159* 164; pillar, 185 
Gautamiswimin or G6mata, images of, ii. 
28 note 

Gavd, i. 73. See Bodh-Gayd. 

Gelugpa, yellow-cap Buddhists in Tibet, 
i. 293 294 

Ghantardld, ruined stupa, i. 34, 83, 84 
Ghats or landing-places, ii. 181 ; Ghusla, 
Benares, 182 

Ghazni, style of architecture, ii. 188, 
189; Buildings of Mahmud and his 
nobles, 191 ; Minar at, 192, 206; 
Ornaments from the tomb of Mahmfid 
at, 193 

Ghusld Ghat, Benares, ii. 182 
Ghy&su-</-din Tughlak, i. 276 
Gill (Major K.), copies ol Ajanid paint- 
ings by, i. 196 no/e 

Girn&r Hill Stdpa, i. 101 notey ii. 31 ; 
shrine of the Jains, 5, 30; Temple 
of Neminath, i. 202, ii. 32; Vastu- 
pala’s temple, 34 

Go-ku-pea tower at Tashi-lhun-po, i. 294 
Golkonda tombs, ii. 189, 279, 280 
G6mata, Gomatervara or Dorbali, Jaina 
image, ii. 21, 72, 73 

Gondophemes or Guduphara, king in 
Gandhdra {cir, 45 A. D.), i. 30, 221, 222 
Gop&l-ganj, temple at, ii. 161 
Gopura,i. 309, 330-346 ; at Kumbaconam, 
395 ; of Cambodian temples, ii. 379 
Govardhan, temple of Handeva at, ii. 

159 ; cenotaphs, 169 
Greco-Baktrians, i. 37 
Greek art in Gandhara sculpture, i. 37, 
219-221, 257 


Griffons, ii. 137, 443 
Gudivdda rnin^ stGpa, i. 34, 83 
Guduphara. See Gondophemes 
Gujarat, Saracenic architecture, ii. 188; 

Historical account, 229-246 
Guntupalle rock - temples, i. 34, 128, 
«9» ISS. iS^noie, 167-169 
Gupta dynasty (320-540 A.D.), i. 11, 23, 
24^ 30; Capitol, 300, 301; ii. ll4i 

Gurkhds, i. 276 

Guruviyankeri dhwajastambha, i. 348, 
ii. 81 ; pavilion at, 79 
Gw&liar, Jaina rock images, ii. 48 ; 
temples, 137 ; Chaturbhuj temple, 137, 
140; S8s-BahQ, 137, 138; Teli-ka 
Mandir, 139, 140 ; Temple or dargah 
of Sindia’s mother, 153 $ view, 154 ; 
M8n Singh’s palace, 175 ; Tomb of 
Muhammad Ghaus, 291 ; view, 292 
Gyan-tse, Tibet, golden temple at, i. 294 
Gydraspur, temple at, ii. 54, 55 


11 ADA or HiodA, stGj^ at, i. 89 
Haibatgrdm stGpa in Top-darra, i. 93 
Halebid in Mysore, temple at, i. 35, 
241, 384; Kedarervara temple, 442; 
view, 443 ; Hoysalervara temple, plan, 
444; restored view of the temple, 
445; its varied design, 446 ; view of 
central pavilion, 447 ; succession of 
animal friezes, 448 ; ii. 386 
I lanamkonda or Anamkond, great temple 
of, i. 432 ; view of doorwa^r, 433 
llaramnkh shrine, Kashmir, i. 267 
Harsha - .S'il&ditya, king, i. 25, 26, 320, 
ii. 121 

Hashtnagar inscription, i. 222 
Hithl-guinphd inscription of KhGravela, 
ii. 10, II 

Hemac^nti temples, ii. 148 and fto/e 
Heta-Da^e vih&ra at Polonnaruwa, i. 
248 

Hiddl. or Had& tope, i. 89, 91 no/e 
liimdlaya, Buddhist missions to, i. 68, 
86 ; Architecture, 251-301 
Hindu five religious sects, i. 178 m/e 

temple at Bftnkurfi, i. 15 

History of India, i. 6-9 
Hiuen Tsiang, Chinese pilgrim, i. 25, 
58, 76, 93 » *03 J a* Amarivatl, 123 ; 
in South Indiaj^ 206, 239, 241, 270, 
272, 275; in AsAm, 289; 292, 308, 
3*9. 357. 421, ii. U m/e, 31, 121 
llokujo temple, near Nan, Japan, iL 499 
Ho-nan, China, Buddhist temple, ii. 461 
Honeysuckle ornament, i. 57, 58 
H6riuji temple, Japan, ii. 486-489, 493, 
496 ; plan of pagoda, 497 ; section, 

498 

Iloysala Ballala kings, 1. 35 



510 


INDEX. 


Htt or **Tee'' of sti^s, i. 66, 70 and 
note, I4S. u. 344* 340* 347, 352, 360, 364 
Hnchchhlmalllgadi temple, at Aihole, ii. 
119 

Hun&ayOn Shfth, tomb of, at Old Delhi, 
ii. 290 

Hilnai, Ephtbalites, i. 24, 31, 222 
Hiishkapar vihAra, L 263 note 
Huvishu, Kttshan king, i. 77, 93 

IbrAhim ’Adil ShAh, mosque and tomb 
of, at BijApAr, ii. 272 
Ike-gami temple, 'near T6kio, Japan, ii. 
491 - 493 * 49 ? 

Images, worship of, i. 222 
ImAmbibra, at Lucknow, ii. 328, 329 
Immigrations, i. 27-31 
India, inducements to the study of its 
ardiitecture, i. 3-6; its history, 6-31 ; 
sculpture, 35 ; mytholog)', 38 ; statistics, 

— • Southern, unsatisfactory records, i. 

31 

, Western, its architecture, ii. 117- 

131 

— • Central and Northern, ii. 132 

, Further, Burma, ii. 339-370; 

Cambodia, 371-403; Siam, 404-413; 
JAva, 414-445 

Indian Saracenic styles, ii. 186; divisions 
of styles and, their boundaries, 188-190. 
See Architecture 

early school of art, i. 223 

Indo-Aryan or Northern style, ii. 84 ; 
reasons for the term, 85. See Archi- 
tecture 

Indra SabhA cave, EliirA, ii. 18-21 
Inlaid marble {pietra dura) work, ii. 

ShAhdheri, i. 218 ; order, 

Frimoya roofs in China, ii. 455, 456, 
464,478,486,488,500 _ . 

Iron pillar at Meharauli, Old Delhi, 11. 
107, 199, 207-209 ; at DhAr, 247 ; iron 
beams at KanArak, 107 
Ishpola tope, i. 92 

Isurumuniya rock - temple, AnurAdha- 
pura, i. 242, 248 

rumadtt-d-daulah’s tomb, Agra, ii. 305- 

307 

Ittagi, ikiva temple at, 1. 424, 425 

{ ABANO (Chandi) temple, JAva, ti. 433 
aga- Mohan or Mandim ii., 93, 99* 
102, 103, 105, 107, 108, no, 1 17 
JagannAth temple, i. 64, ii. 94. 108- 
tio; tower, 110, 115 
Jaggay^peU stftpa, i. 34# 82, 83 
Jago temple (Chandi), JAva, ii. 440; 

^an, 441* 443 .. , 

JahAngir, emperor, 11. 176 ; his buildings 


3 <»» 307. 3*6 
Ionic pillar from 
. ii. 120 


at LAhor, 303; desecration of his 
tomb, 304, 305 

Jaina architecture, ii. 3 ; allied to 
Buddhist, 6 ; region dominated by the 
style, 7. See Architecture 

remains in Kalinga and Orissa, i. 

84 ; Stdpaat MathurA, 102 ; Jainatemple 
in Ceylon, 229 ; diagram of Jaina porch, 
317 ; temple at Pattadakal, 355 ; at 
Aihole, 356 ; at Tiruppadikunram, 362 ; 
Jaina caves, 179, 180, 181 note, 182, 
ii. 9 ; symbols, 1 1 ; temples in DhArwAr 
and BijApOr districts, 23 ; at PAlitAnA, 
24; GirnAr, 30; Mount Abu, 36; 
RAnpur temple, 45 ; Jaina im^es at 
GwAliar, 48 ; temples at KhajurAho, 
49; tower at Chitor, 58, 59; modern 
style, 62 ; Jains in Southern India, 70 ; 
temples at NAgdA, 150; at Kundalpur, 
161 note 

Jains, i. 25, 41, 42, 46, 308, ii. 3, 44 
JAjpur, in Orissa, ii. 95 ; pillar at, i. 

348, ii. Ill ; bridge, 113 
JakanAcharya, reputed architect, i. 442 
JalalAbAd topes, 1. 89, 91 
Jamadagni temple at BaijnAth, i. 298 
JamAlgarhi sculptures, i. 123; monastery, 
209, 210 ; plan, 212 ; Corinthian 
capitals from, 214; cell facades, 216,241 
Jambukejvara temple, Trichinopoly, i. 
373 * 374 394 

Jami’ mosque, Jaunpur, ii. 224; AhmadA- 
bad, 230; plan and elevation, 231 ; 
ChAmpAnir, plan, 242 ; MandA, plan, 
248 ; courtyard, 249 ; Kulbarga, 263 ; 
plan, 264 ; elevation section and view, 
265 ; BijApAr, 269 ; plan, 270 ; section 
of dome, 271; Fatnpur - Sikrl, 294; 
plan, 275 ; Delhi, 318 ; view, 319 
Japan, architecture of, ii. 486 ; temples, 
490 ; roofs, 494 ; palaces, 499 
JatAsandha-kA-baithak at RAjgir, i. 75 ; at 
Giriyek, 76 

Taunpur, style adopted at, ii. 188, 190, 
222 ; plan and view of the JAmi* 
Masjid, 224 ; LAI DarwAza mosque, 
.225 ; Atala Masjid, 226 ; Tombs and 
shrines, 228 

JAva, ii. 414 ; histor}*, 418 ; Boro- 
Budur, 422-428 ; Mendut, 428 ; Dieng 
plateau, 430; Bhlma, 431; Jabang, 
433; PrambAnan, 433; Sewu, 435 ? 
Lumbang, 436; Sari, 437; Kalt- 
Bening, 438 ; Suku, 439 ; Jago, 441 ; 
Panataran, 442 

Jaya-stambhas, pillars of victory, ii. 194, 
206, 209, 360 

Jayavijaya cave at Udayagiri, ii. 15 
Jayeshtha temple, Kashmir, L 267 
JetawanAiAma dAjnib^ AnurAdhapura, i. 

330, 232 ; tem]ue, Polonnaruwa, 245 
JhAlrapattan, remains at, i. 164 



INDEX. 


J hinjhuwilda ^teway, i. 311, 312 
ogervar, BraEmanical cave, i. 199, ii. 127 
Ju^ Kishor temple at Brindfiban, ii. 
1^8, 161 note 

Jum^adh caves, i. 179, x8i note^ ii. 30, 
31 ; tomb, 331, 332 

Junnar, caves at, i. 155-159; plan and 
section of circular, 157; 168 

Kabul, Min&r Chakri, near, i. 61 ; topes 
near, 94 

Kadphises (cir, 80 A.D.), i. 42 ; coins of, 
93 

Kailfis temple, Elura, i. 327, 342-349 ; 
pillar in, 346; age of, 348, ii. 117, 
121, 124, 126, 129 

Kail&^n&tha temple at Conjivaram, i. 

34 , 307, 333 . 357-359 
Kakttsanda, ICankasan, or Krakuch- 
chhanda, 3rd Buddha before Gautama, 

i. 63, ii. 347 

Kal^n Masjid, Delhi, ii. 219 
Kalasa, karka, or finial, i. 324 
Kiliroka, Council under, ii. 359 
Kali-Bening temple, J&va, ii. 437 ; 438 
Kalinganagara, an old capital, ii. 114; 

Kalmgapatam, i. 64 
Kalugumalai, rock -cut temple at, ii. 22 
KalySn, near Bombay, Amlmrn^th temple, 
ii. 147 

K&mboja people, i. 30, ii. 415 ; Kambuja- 
dera, 373 note 

Kan^rak, Orissa, sun-temple, called the 
Black Pagoda at, i. 322; restored 
elevation, 323; diagram plan, and 
section, 324, ii. 93; filled up with 
stones and sand, 95 ; history, 105-107 ; 
iron bars in, 107, 208, 247 
Kanauj, ii. 196 ; mosque at, 68, 69, 201, 
228 

Kdnchi, Kanchipuram, old name of 
Conjivaram, i. 305, 306, 357, 421 
Kangra, i. 297 ; view of temple at 
Klregr&ma in, 299 
Kanhar, Jaina caves at, ii. 19 
Kanheri caves, i. 22, 213 ; great chaitp, 
162; \iew of rail in front, 163 ; capital 
of stambha, 164 ; * Darb&r Cave,’ 
cemetery, 213 

Kanishka, Kushan king and patron of 
Buddhism, i. 22; his era, 29, 219, 
222 ; dftgaba at Pesh&war, 64, 85, 86- 

88 : coiiis, 93-95 : 9* . 

Kank&ll-tila exca\'ations at Mathura, 1. 
83 note 

Kflntanagar temple, ii. 159 ; view, 160; 

*57 

K&nwtyana dynasty («>. 70*35 *• 

21 

Kipadvanj, Kirttistambha at, ii. 136, 
137 ; tank, 182 
Kapilavastu, Nepdl, i. 16 


Kapurdigiri or Sh&hbazgarhi, Aioka in- 
scriptions at, i. 86 
KarhAd, caves at, ii. 124 
KArkala, colossal Jaina statue at, ii. 72, 
73 

KArl£, cave at, i. 59; capital of Lion 
pillar, 60 ; umbrella, 70 ; wooden screen, 
134 ; chaitya, 142-148 ; 161 ; section and 
plan, 143 ; view of exterior, 144 ; of 
interior, 146 ; Lion pillar, 147 ; figures, 
151, 163 ; ii. 344 

Kama Chau par cave, BihAr, i. 130 
Karnak temple at Thebes, ii. 382 
KarAr, or Vanji, Ptolemy’s ‘Karoura,’ 
ancient Chera capital, i. 306 
Kashmir, its architecture, i. 251-272 ; 
writers thereon, 252 ; peculiar form of 
temples and pillars, 255 ; starting- 
point of its arcnitectural history, 258; 
Temple of MArtAnd, 259-264 ; Avanti- 
pur, 264 ; BhaniyAr, 266 ; other 
examples, 267 ; temples near Pind 
Dadan KhAn, 270; Wooden archi- 
tecture, mosque, ii. 105, 333-335 
KasiA, excavations at, i. 175 
Kajyapa, Kassapa or l^thaba, the 
Buddha before Gautama, i. 63, ii. 
347 

Katak, in Orissa, sack of, ii. 95 ; 

Makund Deo’s palace, 112 
KatAs temple, PaniAb, i. 270 
KAthmAndA, Nepal, buildings, i. 274, 
276 

Kaung Hmaudau dAgaba near Sagaing, 
345 

Kawasaki, Japan, belfry at, ii. 499 
KedArervar temple at Halebtd, i. 442 ; 
view, 443 

Kesariya, Tirhut, ruins of a tope, i. 79, 

147 

Khairpur, near Delhi, mosque at, li. 210; 
tomb, 217 

Khaiuraho, Jaina temples at, ii. 49-54; 
Ghantai temple, 52 ; 9^-96, 103 ; HindA 
temples, 140 ; Kandaiya MahAdeva 
temple, 141 ; view, 142 ; plan, 143 
Khali&t, the, ii. 187, 191 
Khandagiri, Jaina caves, ii. 6, 9 ; plan, 10 
KhAravela, king of Kalinga, ii. 1 1 
Kholvi, caves at, i. 129, 166, 167, 170 
note^ 200, 204 

KhorsAbAd, Persia, architecture of, ii. 
468, 481 

Khosni II., king of Persia, i. 421 
Khotan, Buddhist antiquities in, i. 85 
KhurAsAn minarets, ii. 205 
KhwAja JahAn’s mosque at BijApAr, ii. 
269 

Kidal temple, Java, ii. 441 
KlragrAma or BaijnAth temple, ii. 297- 
*99 

Kiri Dagaba, Polonnaruwa, i. 245 



INDEX. 


KMiimukha or Gorgon face, ii. 2Co, 355 
Klrtti-itambhas, at Worang^, !. 434, 
435 ; at Baroli, ii. 1^ ; Galaganith, 
Atfaarii Ermn, MaAer&, etc., 136, 
137 ; at Rijnagar, 184 noU 
X(^,miiiArat,ir86o 
.Kolhapiir, relic box found at, 1, 100 
KonApuDuma or KanakamenUin Burmese 
Gannagon, the second Buddha before 
Gaotama. L ii. ia 7 
KondAnA chaitja cave, i. 134, 137, 148, 
149 » 15S; VihAra, 179, ifo 
KondivtA, in Salsette, Buddhist caves, 
chaitya, i. 131 note^ 199 
KoravAngula temple, Mysore, i. 441 
note, aaa 

Korea, ii. 487, 497 
Kosthakar, Nepalese, i. 279-280 
KotA, mansoleum at, ii. 169 
Kotila tomb, Delhi, ii. 217 
Krishna, Andhra kiim, inscription of, in 
cave at NAsik, L x^-186 
— — temple, at FktAn, i. 282-283 
Kshatrapas of KAthiAw^ and MAlwA, i. 

Kifl^KliAn’i invasion of PagAn, ii. 

KnilA,' fiuddhist caves, Konkan, i. 205 
KujJatissArAma dAgaba, AnurAdhapura, 
i.237 

KukkunAr, temples at, i. 426 
Knlbarga, U. 189, 262; mosque, 263; 
plan, 264; balf elevation and view, 
a6c ; BAiAr, etc., 266 
Kunkas^ cells, ii. 42 . 

Knmbakonam, i. 394; Gopuram or 
gate-pyramid •t. 395 
Kunamoto, Castle at, Japan, 11. 50X 
Kondalpur, Jaina temples at, ii. 64 
161 mU 

KunknniahAdevt, built Buddhist temple 
rtA Lsluhmervar, ii. 70 note 
Kiinigodii temple, i. 407 
Kvmvatti temple, i. 429-431 
Kushan kinn, L 30 

KuiinArA, Where SAkya-sinha died, i. 17 
KutlMdaw or ** thousand and one 

Kyajik-taugyl temple at Amarapura, . ii. 

351-353 

Kyaimg or Burmese Monastery, ii. 357, , 
365-366 

LASftANG monastery, LhAsa, i. 292 
Lito, JshAngir’s buildings at, ii. 303 ; 

BsdshAhi mosque, 304, 321 
Ldli Tissa, Sinhalese king ( 59*49 8.C.), 

L 237 

Lakkundi, teifiple doorway, i. 428-429 ; 

Jaina temple at, ii. 23, 24 
Lakshmervar temples, i. 428 


Lakshmt or 5 rl, goddess of fortune, i. 50, 
iL 428 

LAI DarwAsa mosque, Jaunpur, ii. 225 
LalitAditya-MuktAplda, king of Kashmir 
(725-760 A.D.), i. 26, 263-264, 267, 
270, 272 

Lamasaries in Tibet, i. 292 
LankArAma dAgaba, AnurAdhapura, i. 

233-237 ; capital, 236 
Lankervara temple at KailAs, ElArA, 

J nllar in, ii. 120 

ts, or Buddhist inscription pillars, i. 
54 ; examples, 56-60 
LauriyA Navandgarh lAt, i. 57-58 
Lemyet-hna temple at Prome, ii. 352, 
, 354 . 356, 360 
ZMa : cave, ii. 9 ifa/^ 

LhAsa, i. 290 ; monastery of PotalA at, 292 
LingarAja or Great Temple at Bhuvan- 
exvar, ii. 99-105, 109 
Lion pillar at KArlA, I 147 
Loha MahApAjra monastery, AnurAdha- 
pura, i. 238-23Q 

LokAnanda pajgoda, PagAn, ii. 343 
Lomas Rishi cave, BihAr, i. 131 ; 

fa^e, 131 ; plan, 132 ; 133, 148, 169 
LonAr HemAdpanti temple, ii. 148 
Lophaburi, temples at, Siam, ii. 411 
Loro-Jonggrang temples, JAva, iL 433, 436 
Lucknow arcmtecture, ii. 324; The 
Martiniife, 325; Begam Kothi, 326; 
view, 327 ; ImAmbAra at, 328 ; plan, 

329 

Lumbang temple, JAva, ii. 436 

Machanpontih, Serpent temple at, ii. 
444 

Mackenzie, Col. Colin, Indian researches 
and drawings by, iL 415 
Madan Moham temple at BrindAban, ii. 
157, 161 n^fe 

Madras, prevailing style in the presidency, 
i. 418-4x9 

MadtirA, i. 34 ; conquest of, 305 ; 
PerumAl temple at, 338-339 ; History, 
385; plan of Tirumalai NAyyak’s 
chaultrt, 387 ; pillar in, 387 ; view in 
the hall, 389 ; Aan of the great temple, 
39X ; palace, 4x2; plan, 4x3 ; hall in 
palace, 4x4 

MahAbhArata, i. xo-X2, 39 
MahAbodhi temple, i. 78 ; . imitations, 
280 ; (MahAbaudi), ii. 364 
MahAd caves, i. 206 

MahAdeva temple at PatAn, NepAl, i. 
282, 283 

MahArAshtra, the MarAtha country, iL x 17 
MahA-satl or Necropolis, ii. 164; at 
Udaypur, 165 

MahAsow’s pamon, AnurAdhapura, 1.241 
MahAseva stApa at Mihintale, 1. 238 
MahA-vihAra of the Bo-tree, i. 243 



INDEX. 


Mahitvlni, last Jaioa Tirthahkara* i. 41, 
130, ii. 5 

Mahftwansa, or Buddhist history of 
Ceylon^ i. 7, 224 ; accounts of 
structures in it, 63, 229, 238, 239, ii. 

Mahejwar, ghdt at, ii. 182 
Mahinda and Sanghamitti, missionaries 
to Cevlon, i. 67, 113, 238, 243 
Mahipftla, inscription of^, at Sirnith, i. 75 
Mahishlisura, a demon, ii. 125 
Mahmiid of Ghazni, Somnlth temple 
destroyed by, ii. 35 ; Sacked Mathurd, 
191 ; Tomb, 193, 194 
Mahmdddbid, Tomb of Mubdrak Sayyid, 
near, ii. 243, 244 

Majapahit, ancient city in Jdva, ii. 439 
Makunda Deva*s palace at Katak, ii. 
112 

Malabar, snake-worship in, i. 43 note» 
Malay peninsula, ancient Malaya-de^, 
ii. 374 note 
Malot. See Mulot 

Mdlwd, architecture of, ii. 188, 246-252 
Mdmallapuramor * Seven Pago^,*i. 34; 
Raths at, 124 notey 171-172, 217, 248, 
3*7-338; Shore temple, 361, 362, ii. 
i\\note\ Bas-relief, i. 341, ii. 125; 
Pavilion and stambha at, 79; Roof, 
140 

Mdna-stambha at 6'ravana Belgola, ii. 75 
Mandalay, monastery at, ii. 368 
Mandapas, Mandapanis, i. 309 
Mandapexwar Brahmanical caves, i. 199 
Mandii, capital of Mdlwd, its architec- 
ture, ii. 188, 246 ; Jami* Masjid, 248 ; 
Palaces, 250 

Man^^lacheti pagoda, Burma, ii. 356 
Mdnikydla topes, i. iS, 90, 94-99, 257 ; 

Relic casket, 99 
Manjdrrl, a Bc^hisattwa, i. 175 
Mdnmoda chaitya cave, i. 156-157 
Mdnsingh II., chief of Amber, ii. 177 
Markat Kerari, Orissan king, ii. 112 
Mdrtdnd, temple of, i. 254, 255, 259-264, 
269, ii. 106 ; Plan, i. 259 ; view, 260 ; 
central cell of court, 261 ; date, 262- 
263 ; Niche with figure, 263 ; Soffit of 
arch, 264 

Martiniere, the, at Lucknow, ii. 324-326 ; 
View, 325 

Mashita CMschatta), Palace of Khosru 
Parviz at, ii. 198 

Masson, Mr. C., e.\ploration of the 
Jaldlabad topes, by, 1. 89-91 
Mathid or Lauriyd Navandgarh Lat, i. 57 
Mathurd, Jaina stupa and rail at, i. 1 10 ; 
Sculptures, 1 18, ii. 6 ; Krishna worship, 
seat of, ii. 108; Sacked by Mahmud 
of Ghazni, 191 ; Temple destroyed by 
Aurangzib, 321 

Matris, images of, at jnjpur, ii. Ill 
VOL. 11 . 


Maurya dynasty (320-180 B.C.), i. l 8 - 2 l^ 
Mecluuiical skill of the Cambodians, ii. 

M^d, wooden architecture of, ii. 369 
Mq^thenes, ambassador of Seleukos to 
Chandra^upta Maurya, i. 19 
MeharauUiron pillar. Old Delhi, i. 60, 
ii. 207, 208 and note 

Mendan|[ Kamfilan, now Prambdnan, 
Jdva, li. 433 

Mendut temple, Jdva, ii. 429, 430 
Meru, Mount, ii. 29, 349 
Mihintale, Ceylon, dd^bas at, i. 238 
Mihirakula, lidna king, i. 24, 222, 272 
Mihrdbs or Qiblas in mosques, ii. 197, 
et passim 

Mihtari Mahall, gateway, Bijdpdr, ii. 278- 
279 

Mindrs and minarets : Surkh and Chakri 
near Kabul, i. 61 ; Ghaznt, ii. 192, 
194 ; Qutb, 205 ; Of mosques, 205, 214, 
220, 225, 237 ; Gaur, 259 ; Samara, 469 
Mingiin, circular pagoda at, ii. 349; 

view, 350; Mingftn-pdw, 351, 425 
Mirisavcti ddgaba, Anurddhapura, L 2130 
notey 231-232 

Modherd, Sun temple at, ii. 57 » 106, 
136, 182, 230 

Moggaldna or Maudgalydyana, relics of, 

i. 68, 71, 1 17. 

Monasteries or Vihdras, i. 170 ; Gandhdra, 
209 ; Tibet, 291 ; Burma, ii. 3 ^ 5 - 3 ^ 5 
view, 368 ; Pekin, 462 
Monoliths at Dlmdpur, i. 288 
Moonstones, — ardhachaftdta — thres- 
holds, i. 240, 241 note ; 430 
Mori palace of Ratnasingh, at Chitorgadh, 

ii. 170 

Mortar, non-users of, ii. 432 
Mosques; Adinah, ii. 257; Agra, 317; 
Abmaddbdd, 230 ; ^niir, 210 ; 
Bharoch, 241 ; Bijapur, 269 ; Cambay, 
241; Chdmpdnlr, 242; Delhi, 318; 
Dhdr, 246; Dholkd, 244: Fathpur- 
Slkri, 295 ; Gaur, 257 ; Jaunpur, 224 ; 
Kaldn Masjid, 219; Kashmir, 333; 
Kulbarga, 264; Mandu, 248; Mlrzapur, 
Ahmadabdd, 232; Muhdhz Khdn’s, 
236 ; Qnlb, 200 ; Sarkhej, 233 
Moll Masjid, Agra, ii. 3 * 7 » 3*o; View 
in courtyard, 318 
Moludh temple, Satrunjaya, ii. 30 
Mouhot, M., Researches in Cambodia, ii. 

Mftdabidri, Jaina temples at, ii. 75.77 ; 

Pillars, i. 289, ii. 78. 82 ; Tombs, 80 
Mughal architecture, ii. 282 ; Originality 
of the buildings, 284; Works of Sher 
Shdh, 286 ; Akbar, 288 302; Jahdn- 
gir, 302-307 ; Shdh Jahdn, 307-320 ; 
\\lamgir, 320-323; Mysore and Ottdh, 
3 * 3 - 3*9 

2 K 



INDEX. 


SM 

Muhammad Ghaus, tomb of, at Gwiliar, 
ii. 291 

Muhammadan, population, i. 46, 48 ; 
Architecture, styles of, 188, 189 ; 
Qiblas in Jaina temples, ii. 28 ; 
Destruction of temples, li. 87, 88, 321 
Mukandw&r&, pillars at, ii. 55 ; ChSwadi, 
remains of, X32 

Mukhalingam, temples at, ii. 1 14 
Mukhtagiri, Jaina temples at, ii. 45, 62, 
64 

Mukteiwara temple of, at Bhuvane^war, 
ii. 97-98. 105 

MiMot, in the Salt range, temple at, i. 270 
Mycenae, tomb at, 1. 265 ; Treasury, 

312-313. 32s 

Mylassa, tomb at, i. 313, 314, ii. 167 
Mysore, HindO temples, i. 437-450; 

Architecture, ii. 190, 323 
Mythology of the Hindus, i. 35, 38-45 


NAga, people, i. ii, 43, no; Snake 
divinities, 44, 49, 64, 122, 180, ii. 12, 
104 1 In Ceylon, i. 227, 242, 247 ; 
Kashmir, 272; Ndga-rAja, 156, 341, 
355; NAgas associated with Buddha 
and Vishnu, ii. 127 ; In Cambodia, 
378. 386, 39*» 397. 401 ; JAva, 444 
Nagarah&ra sldpa, i. 90 note 
Nagarakatakani, ancient capital, it. 1 14 
Nagarangana Vih^ra, i. 235 
Ndg&rjuna, Buddhist reformer, i. 23, 87, 
*73 

NSgirjuni, hill and caves in Bihdr, 1. 132, 
*77 

NagAydn temple, near Pagan, 11. 354, 

N^di (Ndgahrad), temples at, ii. 148 
Nagoya, Japan, soldiers^ barracks at, ii. 
Soo 

NahapAna, king, i. 158; Cave at NAsik, 
' 164, 185-186; Pillar in, 185 
Nakhon Thom (the Great City) Cambodia, 
ii. 380 ; Nakhon V^t, 382. See 
Angkor Thom and Angkor Vat 
N&landa, Buddhist monastery, i. vionote^ 


173-174. 293 

Nftnder, Sikh Dehra at, 11. 163 
Nandlrvara-dwipa temple at ^atrunjaya, 
ii. 29 

Nan-GAngi, colossal statue, ii. 55, 72 
Nan-kau pass, archway in, near the 
Great Wall of China, i. 282, ii. 483- 


Nankin, porcelain tower at, li. 469-470 
Nan Payi temple, it 354-355. 363 
Nataahigh 1., king of Orissa, ii. 105-106 
N6sik, Buddhist caves, i. 14, 22 ; 


Chaitya cave at, 140-142; 148, 150, 
«5. *58, *84 ; Vih&ras, 158, 159, 180, 
183-188, 193 ; Capital, 421 
Nata-mandir, or dancing hall, a Sabhn- 


mandap, at Bhuvanerwar, ii. 93, 99, 
102, 103, 109 

Nathlaung-gyaung temple, ii. 353 
Nathukottai Chettis, their injuries to 
temples, i. 376, 380 

Navagraha sculpture at Kanarak, ii. 95, 
106 

N^yyak dynasty at Maduri, i. 386 
Nayyars of Malabar, i. 276 fiote 
Negapattam, Buddhist tower at, i. 33 mte^ 
206-207, 307, 308 

NeminAth temple, on Girn^ir, i. 262, 
H- 32-33 

Nepal, i. 273 ; Its architecture, 274-275 ; 
History, 275-277 ; StOpas or chaityas, 
277 ; Kosthakar, 280 ; Temples, 280- 
285, ii. 369 ; Imagined connection 
with ICanara, i. 286, li. 76-77, 83 
Ngakwe Nadaung-payu in Myingyan 
province, ii. 34a 
Nigliva LAt, i. 59 

Nikko, entrance gateway of temple, ii. 
489, 496 ; Mausoleum of leyasu, 497 ; 
temple at, 499 

Ning-po, seven -storeyed tower at, ii. 469 
Nirvdna of Buddha, 1. 62 ; date of, 224 
Nishi Hongwanji temple, Japan, ii. 493 
Nissanka-Malla, Sinhalese king (1187- 
1 196 A.D. ), i. 246, 247, 248 
Nur Jahi^n,' her tomb, ii. 305 
Nyagrodha'or Suddma, Bihdr cave, i. 

130 

Obskrvatory at Benares, ii. 177-178 
Old Delhi, ruins at, ii. aooff. 

Orders, Classical, misapplied, ii. 324-329 
Orissa, fr^ment of a column from a 
temple in, i. 301 ; Jaina caves, ii. 9 ; 
History, 94; Teniples, 97-110, 116; 
Bridges, 113 

Ornament, honeysuckle, at Allahabad, i. 
57 ; From the tomb of Mahmud at 
Ghazni, ii. 193 
Osia, temples at, ii. ’56 
Orantapuri Buddhist monastery, i. 293 
and note 

Oudh, architecture in, ii. i^, 323-325 
Oxenden’s tomb at Surat, ii. 329-330 

Padmanabha, a name of Vishnu, ii. 137 
Paestum, Doric order at, i. 256 
Pagdn, Burma, ruins of, ii. 355, 356, 
359. 3^ ; Ananda temple, 361 ; 
Thatpyinnyu, plan, 362 ; section, 363 ; 
Gauoaupalin, 363 ; and Tsdldmani, 
362 ; view, 364 

Pagodas, Hindd, i. 322 ; Burmese payas, 
ii. 34* - ^2 ; Siamese, 405 - 41* ; 
Chinese, 468-472, 474 i Japanese, 497 
P*ai - luK or P^ai - fangs, * Honoran^ 
portaU* ol the Chinese, i. 105, 118, 
li. 456, 472 ; Near Canton, 473 ; At 



INDEX. 


P‘ai-lus (continued ) — 

Pekin, 462, 473-474 ; At Amoy, 475 ; 
Japanese, Tori-i, q,v, 

Paithan, Andhra capital, i. 22 
Palaces, ii. 169 ; Allah&bid, 298 ; Amber, 
177 ; Bundi, 173 ; Chitor, 171 ; Chan- 
dragiri, i. 417; Delhi, ii. 309; 
Dattiyd, 173 ; Dig, 178 ; Gwdliar, 
175; L^hor, 303; Madur^, i. 412; 
Pekin, ii. 476, 482 ; Udaypur, 172 ; 
Urch^, 174 

Pa-li Chwang pagoda, Pekin, ii. 464, 
469 

l*alitana, the Jaina sacred hill 4Satrunjaya 
near, ii. 24, 25-30 

J'allava dynasty of Kanchi, i. S05-3071 
357 

Panataran temples, in Java, 11. 442 ; 

Serpent temple, 444 
Panchalingams, i. 374 note 
Panch&lervara temple, near Poona, i. 130 
Pandavas, the, i. ii, 32 
Pandrethan temple, Kashmir, i. 262, 267- 
268 

Pandu Kalins^ menhirs, i. 42 
Pandyas of Southern India, i. 31, 303- 
304, 308, 385-386 

Pantheon, dome of the, i. 313, ii. 273- 
274 

PApanath temple at Paltiidakal, i. 107 note^ 
321, ii. I17-120 

ParAkrama Bahu I. , king of Ceylon (1153- 
1196 i. 224, 228, 235, 244, 245, 

247 

PdrasnAlli Hill, Bengal, Jaina temples on, 
ii. 44, 45 

Parasurdmervar temple, at lihuvanervar, 
ii. 96-97, 105, 114-115, 1 18, 119, 155 
I’arihnSi^ur Vihara, Kashmir, i. 263 note, 
264-205, 272 note 

Parinirvdna figure of Buddha, at Ajanla, 

i. 101 ; At Polonnarviwa, 245 
Parrvandth, 231'd Jaina Tirtliankara, ii. 5; 

Colossal image at EKira. 2i ; Temple 
at Khajurdho, 49 

Partha, Kashmir king (906-921 A.i>.), i. 
267 

Pajupatindth temple, near Kathmandu, i. 
282, 284 

Palaliputra, Maurya capital, i. 19, 64 ; 

Now Patna, 207 note, 

Patan, Anhilawada, ii. 230 
Patan, Nepdl, chaityas at, i. 275, 277 ; 
Temples of Mahddeva and Krishna at, 
283 

Pathan style, ii. 196-214 ; Later Palhan, 
214-221 

Palhans, the, ii. l^, 210 noU\ Their 
architectural glories and career, 197 ; 
Examples, 202-221. See Delhi 
Pathdri, Rashtrakuta Lai, i. 60 ; Temples, 

ii. 133 


S>S 

Patothamya, temple, Myingyan district, 
ii. 354, 356 

Pattadakal, temple of Pdpandth at, i. 321 , 
ii. 117-118, 120; Great Virdpdksha 
temple of, i. 327, 352-355, ii. 121 ; 
Other temples, i. 355, 421 ; Jaina 
temple, 319, 355-356, ii. 23 
Pavilions : Ceylon, i« 240 ; Vijayanagar, 
417 ; B6lilr, 441 ; Halebid, 447 ; 
Guruvdyankeri, ii. 79 ; Sarkhej, 235 ; 
Pekin, 480 

Pawdpuri, Jaina tiriha in Bihar, i. 130 
Paya^i and Payama, pagodas at Prome, 
ii. 342, 360 

Paydtaung temple, Old Prome, ii. 353 
Payer, i&shmiri temple, i. 255, 268; 
View, 269 

Pegu (Hansdwati), ii. 358 ; Shwe- 
Hmaudau pagoda at, 343, 344, 346 
Pekin, ii. 451 ; Temple of Confucius at, 
456, 474; Temple of Great Dragon, 
458-460 ; Buddhist monastery at, 461 ; 
Temples, 463, 481 ; Summer palace, 
near, 463-464, 480 ; Pagoda at, 471 ; 
Buddha’s lialls and Wui’a-Ssii halls, 
464 ; Tombs, 467 ; Pa-li Chwang pa^roda 
near, 469, 472 ; Palaces, 476 ; Tzu- 
chin-cheng or Forbidden city, 476 ; 
T’ai • ho - Pien hall, 476-478 ; Winter 
palace, 482 

Pemiongchi, Sikkim, porch of temple at, 
i. 297 ; view, 296 

Pendants to domes, i. 31 7 ; In Tejahpdla’s 
temple, ii. 42 

Pendentivc, from mosi|ue at Old Delhi, 

i. 220-221 ; BiJdpCir, li. 274 
Pcrsepolitan capitals, i. 138, 178, 215, 

300, ii. 18 j Architecture, 369-370 
Perumdl kings of Kerala or Chera, i. 34, 
306 

Perumal or Vishnu, ii. 359 note ; Perumal 
temple at Madura, i. 339 
Perur, near KoimbatiV., date of porch, ii. 

397 ; Compound pillar at, 399 
Petleik'paya, pagoda in Burma, ii. 342 
Phinieanaicas, temple at Angkor Thom, 

ii. 374 » 376, 399» 400, 402 

Phnom Chisor, Brahmanical temple, 
Cambodia, ii. 380, 397, 400 

Penh, capital of Cambodia, ii. 376 

Phra, a stupa, in Siam, ii. 407, 409 
Phra-chcdi, 407, 408 
Phrabal, Buddha’s footprint, in Siam, 
ii. 408 and note 

Phra Pathom, temple of, ii. 407 
* Fietra dura ’ worL at Agra, ii. 306 and 
note 

‘ Pigeon Monastery ’ of Chinese pilgrims, 
i. 171, 408-410 

l*illars: AjantA, i. 192, 194, 195 ; Amara- 
vati, 121; Avantipur, 265; ^roli, ii. 
135 ; Ceylon, i. 235, 236 ; Chandravati, 



5i6 


INDEX. 


Pillan {cmnimud)— 
ii. 43 ; Delhi, 207 ; Elephanta, 129 ; 
El(ir&, 126 ; Eran, i. 301 ; Fathpnr- 
Stkit, ii. 2^; Hanumkonda, i. 435 
and not€\ Jftjpur, ii. xii ; I^itak, i. 
304 ; Kashmir, 256 ; Madur&, 387 ; 
MAmallapuram, 332 ; Nfisik, 185, 
188 5 Pcrftr, 399 ; Srinagar, 257 ; 
Tanjor, 366 ; Vellor, 399 
Piprfthwa stdpa, i. 79 
Pitakat-Taik, or library, Pagfin, ii. 356, 

Pi^khorA Chaitjra cave, i. 134, 137*138, 
148, 149 ; Sphinx capitals, 169, 250 
Polonxiaruwa, Ceylon, i. 228, 244; Extent 
and epoch of its temples, 244-245; 
Examples, 245-249 

Poona, ikiva rock- temple near, ii. 130 
Porches: AmwA,ii. 56; Chidambaram,!. 

376 ; Delhi, ii. 67 ; Jaina, i. 317, 318 
Potala monastery, LhAsa, i. 292 
Pradakskina^ circumam^latory passage 
' in a temple, i. 237, 322, 427, ii. 50, 
54 i 150 

Prah-khan temple, Cambodia, ii. 374 * 375 > 

PrambAnan temples, JAva, ii. 33, 129, 
418-420, 433 

Prasat temples of Cambodia, i. 246 

PriAnA capitals, i.. 220 

Prome, Py! or Prt,' early capital of Burma, 

Propylons, 11. 225-227 

Prudang, JAva, brick temples at, ii. 442 

Pulastipura, old name of Polonnaruwa, 

i. 244 

Pulikerin I. and II., Chalukya kings, i. 
421 

Puiiyan-kulania, ruins of, near Anuradha- 
. pura, i. 229 note 
Pulumavi, Andhra kine, i> 147 
Pundarika, Jaina temples of, ii. 28 
PurAna literature, i. 8 

KilA Masjid, Old Delhi, ii. 286 

Airf, a shrine, i. 298 
Purl, ii. 94 - 9 Si 105-106 ; Plan of Jagan- 
nAth temple at, 108 ; View of lower, 

j .. 

PyAtthat, spire of a Burmese pagoda, 11. 
3 S 2 » 357 , 368, 369 

Qadam-I-RasCl mosque at Gaur, ii. 256 
(^>aisar BAgh, Lucknow, ii. 326 
Queen’s mosque in MIrzapur, Ahmadalwd, 

ii. 232 

QutbMinAr, Delhi, ii. 198, 199 , 205-207 ; 
Mosque, 68, 198-204, 283 

^Ahl dynasty, ii. 189; Qulbu-d- 

Din Ibak, 196, 205 

Radhia dr LauriyA-ArarAj LAt, i. 57 


Raffles, Sir Stamford, governor of JAva, 
ii. 415, 419, 422, 438, 439, 442, 445 
Rails, Buddhist, i. 55, 102 ; AmarAvatf, 
1 12, 119-121; Bharaut, X03, 104-109; 
Bodh-GayA, 103-104 ; Kanheri, 163 ; 
MathurA, xxo; NAsik, 113; SAnchi, 
102, 111-112, 113 
RAjagriha caves, BihAr, i. 129 
RAjarAnl temple, Bhuvanerwar, ii. 95, 
99, 103105 

RAjasamudra, band of lake, ii. 183, 184 ; 

Kirtti-stambhas on, 137 
R^atarangini, the native history of 
Kashmir, i. 8, 271 

RAma, deified hero, i. 42 ; RAmAyana, 
the exploits of, 10, 1 1 
Ramanya-dera, country, ii. 374 note 
RAmervara cave at ElArA, ii. 121, 129 ; 

RAmejvara temple at Gadag, i. 427 note 
RAmer\’aram, great temple of, i. 380; 
Plan, 381 ; Its dimensions, 382 ; 
Corridors, 383 ; View of central 
corridor, 383 ; 384*385, 388, ii. 383 
KAmnagar, temple at, i. 254, ii. 155 
Ramoche temple at LhAsa, i. 292 
RAmpurwA Lat, i. 59 
RanAditya, Kashmirian king {cir, 6th 
cent. A.D.), i. 255, 263 w/r, 272 note 
Rangoon, Shwe Dagon at, i. 63, 68, ii. 

342, 346-347 ; Pagoda at, 348 
RAni-eumphA cave, the, ii. 13 
RAnt-ka-naur cave, Udayagiri, ii. 8, 12- 

15 

Raniit Singh of the PanjAb, i. 163 
I^nkot dAgaba, at Polonnaruwa, i. 230 
note^ 245 

RAnpur Jaina temple, ii. 45-48 ; Plafi, 45 ; 

View in, 46; 150, 232, 388 
RAnpur JhariAl, Jogin! temple at, ii. 51 
RAshtrakAta dynasty and kingdom, i. 27, 
303, ii. 22 

Raths at MAmallapuram, i. 172, 217, 
3 « 7*?40 

Ratnasingh’s }xilace at Chitorgadh, ii. 
170 

RAvana-ka-khai Cave at ElurA, ii. 121 
RAyana tree, sacred to Adinath, ii. 28, 
47 note 

Red Palace at LhAsa, i. 292 
Relic worshm, Buddhist : origin of, i. 62, 
65, 88; Distribution and depositories 
of the relics, 63, 64, 68, 73, 105, 230, 
238 ; In Tibet, 293 ; Not among Jains, 
ii. 3 ; Discoveries of, ii. 347 
Reservoirs, scope for architectural display 
in, ii. 183 

RewA, Klrtti-stambha at, ii. 137 
RhotAsgarh, ii. 288 note 
River -goddesses, temple of the, i. 345- 
.346 

Roads and bridges of the Cambodians, 
ii. 402 



INDEX. 


5*7 


Rock-cut temples, ii. 120- 131 
Roman domes and arches, i. 313, 316 
Roof at Chandr&vati, ii. 133; AtMImalla- 
puram, Teli-ka Mandir, etc., 140; 
Roofing diagrams, i. 313*315 ; Bengal 
curved style, ii. 254; Chinese, 451*453 
Rude-stone monuments, i. 42, 41 1 
Rudrad^man, Kshatrapa king, ii. 31 
Rummindei L&t, i. 59 
Kuwanveli ddgaba, i. 230-232, 240 

SabuktegIn or Subaktagtn (977*997 
A.i).),founderof the Ghaznaw! dynasty, 
ii. 191 

Safdar Jang, tomb of, near the Qutb, ii. 

323324 

Sahadeva and Nakula Rath, Mamalla* 
puram, i. 336 

Sahsar&m, tomb, of Sher Sh^h at, ii. 
218, 292 

St Stephens, Walbrook, resemblance to 
Hindfi plans, i. 318 
St Thomas, the apostle, i. 30, 222 
5ainin^iga dynasty (650-320 B.c.), i. 15- 
16, 18 

^hiva worship, i. 42, ii. 108 ; Temple at 
Polunnaruwa, i. 248 ; In Nep&l, 277 ; 
Panchiyatana, ii. 144 note 
SajjanUlaya, in Siam, temples at, ii. 408, 
411 

iakas, Skythian invaders, i. 31 
Sdkya monastery in Tiljet, i. 293-294 
Siikvaniuni, the Buddha, i. 16*17, 275, 
260 ; Relics of, 64-65, 79-80 ; Image, 
292, 293, ii. 3 
Salimgarh, Delhi, ii. 288 
Salsette caves, i. 199-200 
SSIuvankuppam, tiger cave at, i. 333. 341- 

342 

Slima Jiitaka, i. 213 

Samara on the Tigris, minaret at, ii. 468- 
469 

Samarkand buildings, ii. 2S6 

Samet ^ikhar or Parasnath hill, ii. 44 

Samosaratias^ Samosans^ Jaina stupas, i. 

54 note, 130, ii. 28, 29, 33, 34 note, 37 
Samudragupta, king {dr, 370-380 A.D.), 
»• 23, 24, 306 ; Inscription, 57 
Sam-yas monastery, Tibet, i. 293 
Sanii caves, in K&thiawSr, i. 179 and note 
SSnchi-Kfin&khedfi, great stupa at, i. 22- 
24, 59, 66-70 ; V^iew, plan and section, 
69; Rails at, 90, 102, 111-119, 250; 
Gateways, 37, 104-110, ii. 136; Small 
stupa, i. II I- 112; Torans, 114, 115; 
Sculptures, 123, 222; Lits, 59; In- 
scriptions, 113 note, 114; Chaitya, 320 
Sangamervara temple at Pattadakal, ii. ^ 
Sangatsudo, temple at Todaiji, Nara, ii. 
494 

Sanghamitta, sister of Mahindn. i. 113, 
243 


Sanghiiima or monastery, i. 170-171 
Sangram Singh, cenotaph of, at Udaypur, 
ii. 165-166 

Sangkalok, Siam, temples at, ii. 411 
.Sankarapura, temples at, i. 265 
Sankaravarma, king of Kashmir (883-902 
A.D.), i. 265 

Sankisa, capital of a L&t, i. 58 
Sapada, pagoda at, ii. 346 
Saracenic architecture of India, ii. 186- 
324; Divisions of style, 188-190 
Sdri-dewal, at Bhuvanejwar, ii. 98 
Sari temple (Chandi) near Praml^nan, ii. 
437 

Sdriputra, relic casket of, i. 68, 71 
Sarkhej, tombs and mosque at, ii. 233 ; 
Pavilion, 235 

Sarndth, Ldt found at, i. 59; Stfipa, 71- 
75. 90, 175. 207, ii. 152, 153 S Capital, 

i. 207 mte 

Sarpacave, Udayagiri, ii. 12 
S&s-bahfi temples at Gw&liar, ii. 137-138 ; 
atNdgdd, 148-149 

^dtakarni or 5dtav&hana, the Andhra 
dynasty, i. 21; 5dtakarni I. (nr. 155 
M.C.), 114, ii. 11, 31 
Satdhdra stfipas, i. 71 
Salt, burning place at Pajupati, i. 282, 284 
Sdt Mahall Prftsada at Polonnaruwa, i. 
245-248, ii. 364 

5atrunjaya Jaina temples near Pdliidnl, 

ii. 24-30 

Sayam-deia, Siam, ii. 373 futte, 404 
Sculptures, Indian, i. 35*38 ; In Gand- 
hdra monasteries, 218-219 
Seinnyet Pagoda, ii. 34;}, 3^ 

Selachaitiya or Kujjatissdrdma ddgaba, 
>• *37 

Sentul, Jdva, structure at, 11. 442 
Sera monastery, Tibet, i. 294 
Serbistfin, ii. 352 

Serpent * worship, i. 43i 7*i 390# 

Temples, 443. 444, , „ 

Sewu, or thousand temples,’ Jflva, 11. 

434 ; Plan, 435 . , , . ^ 

Shidipur, Kashmir, capital from, 1. 256 
Shdhdara, tomb of Jahinglr at, ii. 304- 
305 

Shdhdheri, plan of Ionic monastery at, i. 

218 ; Ionic pillar, 218 
Shdh Hamaddn, mosque of, Srinagar, ii. 

Shili^Jah&n, i. 265, ii. 176; His works, 
307-320 

Shdhjahdn&bdd, modern Delhi, ii. 199 
Shdh Mir of Kashmir, i. 272 
Shahr-I-Bahlol, excarations at, i. 210 
Shftlimdr gardens, Kashmir, i. 262-265, 
ii. 304 ; Delhi, 199 
Sharql architecture at Jaunpur, ii. 188 
Sher Shih, ii. 284*287 ; His tomb, 217, 
218, 287-288, 292 



INDEX. 


Si8 


Shih^bu-d-Dtn ibn Sdm, ii. 194, 196 
Shint6 temples in Japan, ii. 486, 497, 502 
Sh6gun palaces, Japan, ii. 500 
Shore or Aleva temple, at Mimallapuram, 

i. 361 

Shwe-DagAn pagoda, at Rangoon, ii. 342, 
344, 346-347 

Shwe-daik at Amarapura, ii. 357 
Shwe-Hmaudau pagoda, Pegu, ii. 343, 
344, 346 ; Plan, 343 
Shwe-Tshandau pagoda, ii. 349 
Shwe-zigon pagoda, near Pag^n, ii. 349 
Siam, early and present capitals, ii. 404 ; 
Sukhodaya and AyuthiS, 404, 405 ; 
Bangkok, 410 

Siddhanith temple, K&ngri, i. 30 z 
Sidhpur, Gujar&t, temples at, ii. 230 
Sikandar Shfth, Bhmshikan, king of 
Kashmir (1393-1416 a.d.), i. 253, 
263-265, 267, 272 

Sikandara, tomb of Akbar at, ii. 298-301 
.S'ikharas or spires, viminas, i. 322-326 
Sikhim, temples in, i. 295 
5iliditya, Harshavardhana, king, i. 25 
Simharotsiki temple, Kashmir, i. 255, 
262, 263 note 

Sinbyum^ or Sinphu-^Mibayd, pagoda at 
Mingiin, ii. 349 

Singasari, J.^va, temple at, ii. 440, 441, 
442 

Singhint, goddess or demon, i. 280 note 
Sinhalese sculfsture, i. 226, 227 
Sitd-marhi cave, BihSr, i. 133 
^iva, earliest representations, i. 42, 44 
note\ 5ivdlayas, 344, 358, ii. 129 
Skandagiipta, king {cir, 465 A.D.), i. 23, 

ii. 31 

Sluices, architecturally treated, ii. 185 
note^ 241 

Snake-sculptures, ii. 443, 444 
Somejvar temple, at Gadak, i. 427 ; At 
Mukhalingam, ii. 114 
Somndth temple, Gujarat, i. 27, ii. 34; 
plan, 35 ; 191, 193 

Somndthpur, Mysore, Kerava temple at, 
i. 437 ; view, 438 
Sompalle, stambha at, i. 348 
Sondgarh, Bundelkhand, Jaina temples 
at, ii. 62 

Sonari topes or stupas, i. 72 
Sonbhandar c.'ive, Rajgir, i. 130, 175, 176 
Sopdrd or Sup.drn Stdpa, i. 87 note^ 100 
Spean Ta-on, Naga head from, ii. 378 
Sra^ or tanks, in Cambodia, ii, 378, 408 
5ravana Belgola, i. 303 ; colossal Jaina 
statue at, ii. 72 ; temples, 74 ; view, 75 
5rdwaks. Jaina laity, ii. 3 
.Vrl or Gaja Lakshmt, goddess of fortune, 
i. 50, 116, 123, 156, 429, ii. II, 15, 
28 niiti 

Sri Allaiii lower at Chitor, ii. 57 ; view, 

58 


5rlnagar, Kashmir, i. 256 ; pillar at, 257 ; 
Jdmi* Masjid at, ii. 333 ; Hama&n 
mosque at, 333 ; view, 334 
5rirangam or Seringam, pillared hall at, 
i. 368; plan, 369 ; view of temple, 371 
6ri iiailam temple, i. 171 note, 400 ; plan, 
409 

Sron-dtsan-rgdm-po, Tibetan king {nr. 
630 A.D.), introduced Buddhism into 
Tibet, i. 292 

Stambhas, i. 54, 56 - 61 ; At Hindu 
temples, 368; Jaina, ii. 21, 8i ; At 
Guruvdyankeri, 81 ; At Purl, 106 
Statistics, i. 45-49 

Statues : at S»seruw^a and Aukana, i. 245 
note ; Gwdliar, ii. 48 ; Nan GOngi, 
55, 72 ; .Jravana Belgola, 72 ; Kdrkala, 
72 ; Yendr, 73 

Stein, Dr. M. A., his translation of the 
' Rdjatarangini,’ i. 8 note 
Stdpas or Topes, i. 20, 54, 62-75 ; StOpa 
worship, 66 ; Stupas or Chaityas in 
Nepdl, 277 

Subrahmanya temple, Tanjor, i. 365 
Sudima cave, Rirdbar, i. 130, 132, 133 
Sukhodaya, early capital of Siam, ii. 404, 
406, 409 

Suku, Java, group of temples, ii. 439 ; 
Their resemblance toedificcs in Yucatan 
and Mexico, 439 

Sultdnganj, near Mongtr, vMra at, i. 175 
Sultdnpur, tope at, i. 91 ; small model 
found in the tope, 152, 153 
Sumatra, ii. 4^ 

Sun w'orship, ii. 106 
5unga dynasty {cir. 180-70 B.C.), i* 21 
Sqpdrsva, Jaina stilpa of, at Mathurd, i. 
no 

Silraj Mall of Bharatpur, ii. 178 
Surkh Minar, Kdbul, i. 61 ; Tope, 90 
Surya, the Sun god, figures of, i. 17S, 
301 ; ii. 16, 434 

Ndrayan, i. 262, ii. 106 

Siiryopdsakas, Suir woibliippers, i. 178 
Suvarnabhumi, in Lower Burma, i. 19, 
357 

Swat, discoveries in, i. 89, 93, 210 
Swayambhiindlh, temple of, Nepal, i. 275, 
278-279 

Swetdmbara Jains, ii. 3, 4, 7 
.S'yala or leogriff emblem, i. 442 

7'aas or t'ais of the Chinese, ii. 467, 

46S-472 

T.idpatri, temples at, i. 403 ; \’iew'S of 
Oopuram, 405, 406 

Tagiiung, early capital of Burma, ii. 359, 

Tah-?Jianas, cellars, ii. 251 
Tcij Mahall, comparison with the 
Furlhciion, 11. 284; au liilert, 30C note ; 
the monument, 313 ; view, 314 ; plan 



INDEX. 


TSj Mahall {continued) — 
and section, 315; details, inlayings, 
etc., 316 

Ta Kdo, Cambodia, temple at, ii. 399 
Takht-i-Bahai, monastery at, i. 210; 

plan of, 212 ; arches, 258 
Takht-!-Sulaim^n, Kashmir, old temple 
at, i. 254, 267 note, 272 ; ii. 154 
Takshajild, Taxila, ancient capital in 
Panjdb, i. 11, 86, 99, 217 
Talajd Caves, Saurdshtra, i. 179, 186 
Tamani, pagoda at, ii. 344 
Tamil race and cognate peoples, i. 32>33; 

302 

Tanjor, i. 206 ; great temple at, 307, 
362 ; diagram plan of the Temple, 

363 ; View, 364 ; Temple of Subrah- 
manya, 365 ; Court in the palace, 415, 
416 

Tantric images, i. 42 
Ta Prohm, temple at, ii. 396, 400 
Taramangalam, temple at, i. 407 
Tashiding temple, Sikhim, i. 295 
Taslii-lhun-po, cemetery at, i. 2x3 note'; 

monastery, 293 note, 294 
Tatta, tomb of Nawdb Sharfa Khdn near, 

. ii. 281 

Tdtvd-gumphd caves, Khandagiri, ii. 17, 
18 

Tavernier, M. J. B., at Mathurd, ii. 
321 note 

Taxila. See Takshaiild 
Tee, Burmese Hit, hnial of a StOpa, i. 
66, 70 and note, 145, ii. 344, 346, 352. 

364 

Tejahpdla's temple at Abd, ii. 36, 40; 
plan, 41 I dome, 42 

Temples : AbC, ii. 36; Ahmaddbdd, 65 ; 
Aihole, i. 320, ii. 119; Ajmir, 68; 
Amritsar, 161 ; Ambarnath, 14; Amwd, 
56 ; Avantipur, i. 264 ; Bangkok, ii. 
410 ; Bakeng (Mount), 399 ; Bdnkurd, 

i. 15; Baroli, ii. 133; BelCir, i. 437; 
Benares, ii. 151 ; Bhangarh, 55 ; 
Bhaniydr, i. 266 ; Bharaut, 159 ; Bhat- 
gdon, 280; Bhuvanerwar, ii. 99 ; Boro- 
Budur, 420 ; Brinddban, 155 ; Cam- 
bodia, 380; Chandrdvati, 132 ; Chinese, 

ii. 451 ; Chidambaram, i. 373 ; Chitor, 
150; Colombo, 339; Conjivaram, 
357 : Helhi, ii. 66 ; Dieng plateau, 
430 ; Gaudaupalin, 363 ; Girndr, 32, 
34 ; Gwdliar, 137, 153 ; Gyan-tse, i. 
294 ; Gydraspur, ii. 54 ; Halebid, i. 
442 ; Hanamkonda, 432 ; Hokujo, ii. 
409; llo-nan, 461; H6riuji, 486; 
Ike-gumi, 491 ; Ittagi, i. 424 ; Jagan- 
ndtli, ii. 108 ; Jdva, 422 ; Kandrak, 
93i 105 ; Kanauj, 68 ; Kdntanagar, 
159 ; Khajuraho, 49, 140 ; Kfragrdma, 
296 ; Madura, i. 391 ; Mdrtdnd, 259 : 
Mendut, ii. 428; Mudabidri, 7S ; 


5*9 

Mukhalingam, 45 ; Mdlot, i. 270 ; 
Ndgdd, ii. 148 ; Nepdl, i. 280 ; Pagdn, 
ii. 361 ; Pdndrethan, i. 267 ; Patdn, 
283 ; Pattadakal, 321, 352, ii. 89, 117 ; 
Payer, i. 268; Pemiongchi, 296; Poona, 
ii. 130; Rdmervaram, i. 380; Rdnpur, 
ii. 45; Somndthpur, i. 437; Sondgarh, 
ii. 62 ; 5 ravana Belgola, 74 ; 5 rtrangam, 

i. 368 ; 5 ri 5 ailam, 408 ; Suku, ii. 
439 ; Tdnjor, i. 362 ; Tashiding, 295 ; 
Tinnevelly, 392 ; Tiruvdldr, 366 ; 
Udayapur, ii. 146 ; Vellor, i. 369 ; 
Vijayanagar, 401 

Temples in Vedic times, ii. 88 
Tennoji pagoda at Osaka, ii. 499 
Ter, structural Chaitya at, i. 125, 319 
Teshu Ldma Erdeni, monuments to, i. 
294, ii. 463 

Thai Rukhan stdpa, Sindh, i. 100 
Thatdn or Thahtdn, ii. 356, 357 ; pagoda 
at, 358; 364 

Thatpyinnyu temple, at Pagdn, ii. 354 ; 

plan, 362 ; section, 363 
Thein, an ordination hall in Burma, ii. 
356, 406 

Thevadas, devatds, goddesses in Cam- 
bodia, ii. 389, 397, 398 
Thitsawada, temple at, ii. 363 
Thomson, Mr. J., his photographs of the 
gre.'it temple at Angkor Vdt, ii. 372, 

384. 385* 387-389 

Thupdrdma, ddgaba, Anurddhapura, i. 
233 ; pillars, 235, 237 ; Temple at 
l^olonnaruwa, 247 

Tibet; exclusion of travellers, i. 290 ; 
Worship of tombs of the Grand Lamas, 
and number and character of its 
monasteries, 291 ; Potala, 292 ; Gyan- 
tse, 294 

Tiger cave or Bdgh-gumphd, Udayagiri, 

ii. 16 

Tigowd, temple at, ii. 133 
Tiniurlang, Tartar conqueror, 1369-1405, 
ii. 197, 229 

type of temple in China, ii. 451, 
461, 464, 488, 500 

Tinnevelly, temple at, i. 392 ; Dimen- 
sions, details, etc., 394 
Tirthankaras or Tirthakaras, Jaina saints, 
i. 41, ii. 4> 5> 

Tirumalai Ndyyak, i. 305 ; His chaultri, 
386 ; Dimensions, cost and ornamenta- 
tion, 387 ; View in, 389 ; Raya 
gopuram, 390 

Tirupati temples, i. 404 and note 
TiruvalKir, temple, Chingalpat district, i. 
366 note 

Tiruvdlur temple, Tanjor district, i. 366- 
368, 374 note, 379 

Tombs : BijapCir, ii. 272 ; Batwd, 240 ; 
Cambay, 241 ; Chinese, 465 ; Delhi 
(Old), 209, 217 ; Gwdliar, 153 



520 


INDEX. 


Tombs (continued ) — 

Gttjarftt, 238, 244 ; Junigadh, 331 ; 
MAdabidri, 80; Sikandara, 298; Sar- 
khej, 234 ; S^i, near Gwiliar, 216 ; 
Surat» 339 ; T&j Mahall, 313 ; Tatta, 
281 ; Udaypur, 165 

Tooth of Buddha, its sanctity, shrines, 
migrations, etc., i. 63, 64, 235 
Topes or StApas of the Buddhists : their 
rorm and puroose, i. 54, 62; BhilsA 
group, 66 ; Example at Sinchi, 68 ; 
Accompaniments of these structures, 
70; SArnAth and BihAr, 71-75 ;JarA- 
sandha-ka baithak, 75-76; Bodh-&iyA, 
76-80 ; AmarAvati, £>, 81 ; GandhAra, 
S4-89 S JalAlAbAd group, 89 ; Bimaran, 
90 ; SultAnpur, 91 ; Cnakpat and ’Ali 
Masjid, 92 ; Ahin Posh, 93 ; Mini- 
kyAla, 94-99; Bhattiprolu, 34; Jag> 
gayyapeta, 34, 82 ; Thai Rukhan, 
100 

Torans, i. 115. Gateways 
Tori-i, gateway before Shintfi temples in 
Japan, i. 118, ii. 493, 497 
Towers; Chitor, ii. 57, 59: Angkor 
Thom, 394; Bangkok, 411 ; Nankin, 
470 

Tree and Serpent Worship, i. 14, 20, 43, 
44 ; Tree worship, 105, 108, ii. 71 
Trefoiled arches, i. 258 
TrikAteivar tenmle, at Gad^, i. 427-428 
Triratna symbol, i. 49 ; at SAnchi, 116 ; 

AmarAvati, 123-124 ; BhAjA, 136 
Tsedi or Zedi, a chaitya, ii. 341 
TsAlAmani (ChAlAmani) temple, Burma, 
ii. 354* 362, 363 

TughlaqAbAd, at Old Delhi, ii. 198 ; tomb 
at, 215, 227 

Tulja Lena, caves at Junnar, i. 156 
Timyon or StupArAma, pagoda near 
. Si^inf , ii. 345 

Tumer^s Embassy to Tibet, i. 213 


Udayagiri, Katak, caves at, i. 180 ; ii. 
917 

Udayapur, GwAliar, temple at, ii, 147 ; 
view, 146 

Udaypur, MewAr, MahAsatt near, ii. 165; 
palace, 172 

Ujjain kingdom, i. 24, 67 ; GhAts at, ii. 
182 

U-k’ong, Chinese pilgrim, i. 270 and 
mte, 272 

Umar Khel tope, i. 90 
Umbrellas on stApas or chaityas, i. 70, 
95, 151, 152 

Upali Thein, at PagAn, ii. 356 
UpAmya, a Taina monastery, ii. 27 note 
UpasthAnarAla or Uposathagara, Buddhist 
meeting hail, i. 213, 242, ii. 406 note 
OrchA, Bundelkhand, palace at, ii. 174 


Vadnagar, GujarAt, Klrtti-stambhas at, 
ii. 136 

VAhlilms, Baktrians, ii. 209 
VaidyanAtba temple, at KIragrAma, i. 
297-301 

VaikunthanAth temple, at Conjivaram, i. 
34* ii. 359 

VairAll, in TirhAt, i. 18, 130, 276, ii. 3, 

405 

Vaishnava AvatAras, i. 41, 42 ; Vaishnava 
temples in Nepal, 277 
VajraahAtu Mandala, i. 280 
Valabhi dynasty (cir, 600-770), i. 23, 24, 
26-28 

VAngath or WAniyat, Kashmir, temples 
at, i. 267 

VastupAla’s temple, GirnAr, ii. 33 
Vasul^ndhu, Buddhist Patriarch, i. 
276 

\’At, the outer enclosure of a Cambodian 
temple, ii. 406 

Phu temple, ii. 375 

Sisavai, temple at Sukhodaya, ii. 

343. 409. 41 1 

Vaults, ii. 329, 353. 354. 357 
Vedi, a HindA altar, ii. 123 
Vedic worship, i. 39-41 
Vellor, i. 390 ; view of portico of temple, 
397 ; Compound pillar, 399 
Ventura, General, topes opened by, i. 
94* 97 

VidyAdevis, Jaina goddesses of know- 
ledge, ii. 42 

VidyAdharapuram, chaitya remains, i. 
128 

Vigne’s Travels in Kashmir, i. 252 
VihAras, or monasteries, i. 55, 170 ; 
Diagram, 172; NAlanda, 173; SultAn- 
ganj, 175; SArnAth, 175; Western 
Caves, 177-182; NAsik, 183-188; 
AjantA, 188-196; B^h. 197, 198; 
ElArA, 201 - 205 ; VijayArAma, 242 ; 
Otantapuri and VikramajtlA, 293 
Vijayanagai ; View of city gateway, i. 3i 1, 
400 ; Destroyed by the Muhamadans 
in 1565, 401 ; Plan of the temple of 
VuthalaswAmin, 402 ; view of (mrch, 
463 ; Palaces, 412 ; Garden pavilion at, 
416, 417 ; bAzAr, ii. 266 
VijayArAma monastery, Ceylon, i. 230 
note ; VihAra, 242 

VikramartlA monastery (near KolgAon), 

i. 293 note ” ^ 

Vimala’s temple. Mount AbA, ii. 36-40; 
VimAnas or shrines and .Sikharas, i. 

309. 3**-3*5. 330 
Viparyi Buddha, i. 275 
Viram'gAm talav or tank, ii. 182 
Virinjipnram, temple at, i, 407 
Vishnu, identified with SArva, i. 262, 
263 ; second AvatAru at Angkor VAt, 

ii. 3^ ; Vishnu-devala, Ceylon, i. 248 



INDEX 




Viivakarma, Buddhist cave, Eldii, i 
159-163, ii. 131 
Visvantara JAtaka, i. 313 
Vifvexvar temple, Benares, ii. 151 ; View, 

15a. 155 

Vyfehrint, guardian demon, i.‘ 380 noti 
Vyilis, conventional figures of lions, i. 
33a, 359. 360, 386. 396, 398. 401. 
436 Hfite ; 443 

Wall, Great, of China, ii. 483 
Wftniyat, temples at, i. 367 
Wata-da-ge temple, Polonnaruwa, i/ 

W8vs or step-wells, 11. 339, 240 na/e 
Wessantara, npw Besnagar, i. ' 67 ; 
Jfttaka, 116, 313 

Western Chaitya halls, i. 133*169 
Window at Ahmad&b&d, ii. 237 ; at Nan- 
Davft. Burma, icc 

Wooden architecture, i. 51 ; Wooden 
verandahs, 176; Temples, similarity 
to the wo^en architecture of Sweden 
and Norway, 286 - 288 ; Kashmir, 


mosques at Srinagar, ii. 333*335; 
In Burma, 369 

Worangal or Orangal, i. 432 ; klrtti- 
stambhas at, 434 

Yaksha, a demon guardian, i. 142 

Yakuahiji, pagoda at, ii. 499 

Yajna cave, Nksik, i. 187 ; Pillar in, 
188 

Yavana-dera, ii. 373 mie 

Ya^iti Kerari, legendary king of Orissa, 
ii. 94 

*Yedo (T6kio), castle, ii. 499 

Yenfir, colossal Jaina statue at, ii. 73 

Yue-chi tribe, invaded Baktria, i. 39, 86 

Yucatan architecture and early Javanese, 
«• 439 

Ynng-lo, tomb of, ii. 466-468 

ZaiNU-L-*Abid!n’s tomb at 5rlnagHr, 1. 

* 53 . * 54 , 272 

Zeionises satrap, coin of, found at Mani* 
kyiU, i. 95 

ZiArats or shrines of Moslim Firs, t. 272 









