takes them as 3rd plural of the 3rd class Essays, ii. 41. 




TRANSLATION OF THE 
KAUSITAKI BRAHMANA 


44 o*®* 2&] 




ADHYAYA I 


The Estahlishing of the Fires. 

i. 1. In ' this world both the gods and men were. The gods going to 
the world of heaven said to Agni ‘ Be thou for us the overseer of this 
world/ To them replied Agni * But, since I am he among you whose contact 
is most dangerous, and men do not pay honour (to me), how will that become 
yours which is among men ? ’ The gods said ‘ The dread forms of thee as 
such we will deposit apart, and then wilt thou be here for man with that 
form of thine which is auspicious, helpful, and worthy of sacrifice.' Then 
in the waters they placed (his form as) blowing, in the wind (his form as) 
purifying, in the sun (his form as) bright. Then with his auspicious, 
helpful, and sacrificial form he burned hero for men. These indeed are 
the forms of Agni. In that he offers to these deities, then Agni becomes 
delighted with his limbs and with his forms. These are three; three 
indeed are these worlds ; verily thus he obtains these worlds. The full- 
moon offering is the model of the first (sacrifice), the new-moon offering of 
the second ; thereby does he commence the new- and full-moon (offerings). 
The invitatory and offering verses ® of the first contain (the words) ‘ praise ' 
and ‘ bearer of the oblation ' ; that is the form of the invitatory and invoking 
verses. Those of the second ® have (the word) ‘ Agni ' twice, for he offers 
to two Agnis. The third has seventeen Samidheni verses ; the Is^i and 


^ In i. 1-2 the establishing of the three 
sacrificial fires is very briefly dealt with. 
In the Sutras, though the establishing is 
a necessary preliminary to any rite of 
the ^^auta ritual, the establishing does 
not come first in order but is relegated 
to the treatment of the new- and full- 
moon sacrifices which, as is also here 
stated, serve as the groundwork or model 
(tantra) of all Istis. For the ritual see 
A9S. ii. 1.9 seq, ; ii. l seq . ; B^S. ii. 
12-20; Mgs. i. 6. 15; ApgS. v. 1 seq.; 
Kgs. iv. 7-10 ; LgS. iv. 9. 10 seq. ; 12. 6. 
seq . ; Vait.Vf vi. The point here dealt with 


is the making of offerings to the three 
forms of Agni ; there is no parallel in 
AB., but cf. KS. vii. 10 ; viii. 1, 8-6, 10; 
MS. i. 6 ; TB. i. 1. 2-10; gB. ii. 2. 1. 6 seq. 
See Hillebrandt, RituaUitteralur^ § 59; 
Eggeling, SB£. xii. 274, 275. 

* I. e. the Yajya and Puronuvakya for the 
offering to Agni Svistakrt. The verses 
referred to are RV. v, 14. 8 and iv. 8. 6, 
which contain ilate and havydya vodhave 
and havydddiihhify. 

s I. e. the verses used are RV. i. 12 2 and 6, 
which both have the word Agni twice. 



[348 


i. 1 — ] The Establishing of the Fires 

Pa^ubandha offerings have seventeen Samidheni verses;^ therefore he 
obtains the Isti and Pa9ubandha offerings. The offerings of the butter® 
portions have (the word) ^ be ’ ; (with the desire) ' Let me be he establishes 
the fires ; * May I be ’ he desires. He, even if being very contemptible as it 
were he establishes the fires, quickly prospers; he attains enjoyableness, 
who makes them possessed of (the word) ‘ be The invitatory and offering 
verses are Viraj verses ; ® prosperity and proper food are the Viraj, (and so 
they serve) for the winning of the Viraj as prosperity and proper food. 
These are Gayatri verses ; Agni is connected with the Gayatri and has 
the Gayatri for his metre ; verily thus with his own metre he establishes 
the fires. They are uttered inaudibly ; the establishing of the fires is an 
outpouring of seed ; inaudibly is seed outpoured. They are appropriate 
what in the sacrifice is appropriate, that is perfect; (so they serve) 
for the perfection of the sacrifice. Twelve (cows) should he give ; the year 
has twelve months; verily (they serve) to make up the year. He gives 
a horse as thirteenth, to make up the thirteenth month. 

i. 2. The gods and the Asuras were in conflict over ^ these worlds. From 
them Agni departed, and entered the seasons. The gods, having been 
victorious and having slain the Asuras, sought for him ; Yama and Varuna 
discerned him. Him (the gods) invited, him they instructed, to him they 
offered a boon. Ho clioso this as a boon, ‘ (Give) me the fore-offerings and 
the after-offerings for my own, and the ghee of the waters and the male of 
plants.’ Therefore they say ‘ Agni’s are the fore-offerings and the after- 
offerings; Agni’s is the butter.’ Then indeed did the gods prosper, the 
Asuras were defeated. He prospers himself, his foe is defeated, who knows 
thus. 

i. 3. They ^ say, ‘ In which season sliould he re-establish (the fires) 1 ’ ‘In 


^ At the now- and full-moon sacrifices there 
are used 15, Hillebrjindt, Neu- und Voll- 
mondsopfer, pp. 74-79 ; 17 at the animal 
sacrifice, Schwab, Das altindische Thieropferj 
pp. 82, 83. For 17 as the cliaracteristic 
number as an Isti see i- 2. 12. 

® RV. V. 13. 14 which has asi and i. 91. 9 
which has sdniL We must read yadi ha 
and svaisavira iva ; Yinayaka has sraisd vita 
but this is nonsense ; see Weber, Ind, 
Stud. i. 228; x. 153, n. 1 ; Keith, JRAS. 
1916, p. 501. 

• These are RV. vii. 1.3 and 18 ; see 9®- h 0. 

2 . 12 . 

I. e. the other verses used are in the Oftyati I 
metre ; cf. QB. ii. 2. 1. 17. 

* The locative is one of what is fought for, 


as with sprdhf AB. vi. 34. 2 ; Delbriick, 
Altind. Synt. p. 119. The construction 
appears in Sanskrit in the well-known 
example carmani dvlpinam hanti dantayor 
hanti kunjaram {Kd^ikd on Fanini, ii. 
3. 36) which need not be traced to Pali as 
Kiolhorn (JRAS. 1898, p. 19) was inclined 
to do. 

i. 3. ' This chapter with i. 4 and 6 deals briefly 
with the Punaradheya of the fires ; there 
is nothing parallel in AB., but cf. TS. i. 

5. 1 seq. ; KS. viii. 14-ix. 3 ; KapS. viii. 
2-6 ; MS. i. 7. 1-5 ; (^B. ii. 2. 3. 2-6. For 
the ritual see A^S. ii. 8. 4 seq . ; 95®* ii* 

6. 1 ; B9S. iii. 1-3 ; M9S. i. 6. 5 ; v. 1. 2. 
6 seq. ; Ap9S. v. 26 ; K9S. iv. 11 ; Vait. 
viii. 3 ; Hillebrnndt, Rituallitteratur^ § 60. 



349] 


[— i. 4 


The Re’estallish'nient of the Fires 

the rains ’ some say ; in the rains are all desires ; verily (it serves) to obtain 
all desires. In the middle of the rains, with regard to the Naksatra, the 
Punarvasus, he should re-establish (the fires) (saying) ‘May riches and 
wealth again come to me.' Thus (it serves) for the winning of a repeated 
desire. In this period (the new moon) does not in the first half (of the 
month) come into conjunction with the Punarvasus. On the new moon 
which follows after (full moon) in the Asadhas ^ should he re-establish ; it 
is in conjunction with the Punarvasus. The desire is obtained that is in 
the new moon, there is obtained that in the rains, there is obtained that 
in the Punarvasus ; therefore on that day should he re-establish. The cake 
is offered on five potsherds the Pankti has five feet; the sacrifice is 
fivefold ; (so it serves) to obtain the sacrifice. 

i. 4. With discriminations^ he offers the fore-offerings and the after- 
offerings; the fore-offerings and the after-offerings are the seasons; thus 
does he gather him from the seasons. The discriminations are the head words 
of these Res, ‘ O Agni, come for enjoyment ' ; ‘ Agni we choose as messenger ’ ; 
‘ By Agni Agni is kindled ' ; ‘ May Agni smite the foes ’ ; ‘ Of Agni the 
praise we meditate ’ ; ‘ To Agni that mortal who doth service.* They are six ; 
the seasons arc six ; verily from the seasons for a second time he gathers him. 
The last fore-offering and after-offering are unaltered. Thus he does not 
depart from the fore-offerings and the after-offerings. The first butter- 
portion is connected with the slaying of Vrtra;^ verily (it serves) for the 
destroying of the evil one. Thus he does not depart from the model of the 
full-moon sacrifice. ‘ He should make the first (butter-portion) for Agni, the 
wise, (saying) “Agni do ye awaken with the praise",’® some say, ‘the 

2 Tho date fixed is a refinement on that of offerings the normal forms are changed 

TS. and ii. 1. 2. 10 which prescribe by the addition, after the word denoting 

merely the Punarvasus. B^S. iii. 1 fixes the object of offering, of a case of the 

tho date as on tho now moon in the word Agni; the other two are left un- 

Punarvasus preceding tho full moon altered. Accordingto Eggoling (SBE. xii. 

in the Asadhas, a variance in view 317, n. 4) and Hillebrandt, vibhakfayah 

possibly because of the duplicate nature directly denote the ^ cases ’ of the word 

of the Naksatra Asadhas as tho 18th and Agni, but this is not, it seems, precisely 

19th Naksatras, while Punarvasus is the the sense, but rather (cf. TS. i. 6. 2. 2) 

fifth. Cf. Caland, Ueber da^ rituelle Siitra they are ^discriminations* between tho 

des Baudhayanay pp, SQ, S7 , ordinary forms of tho fore- and after- 

* This refers to tho fact that in place of the offerings. The sense ‘ cases * cannot hero 

three Istis of i. 1 a cake is offered to be regarded as natural. The verses cited 

Agni on five Kapalas ; the verses of the are RV.vi.16. 10; i.4. 1 ; 12.6; vi. 16. 34 ; 

offering are in Pankti metre, viz. RV. iv. v. 13. 2 ; vi. 14. 1. Cf. ZDMG. xxxvii. 25. 

10. 2 and 4, and for the Svistakrt offering, ® Because it has the words (RV. vi. 16.34) 
iv. 10. 4 and 1. Agnir vrtrdni jaUghanat ; see Hillebrandt, 

^ The point is that in the case of the first Neu~ und Vollmmdsopfery pp. 102 seq, 

four fore-ofle rings and the first two after- ^ RV. v. 14. 1. So 9^^- ii- 3. 21. 



i.4 — ] The Re-estahlishing of the Fires [350 

fire of him who removes the fire is asleep as it were, verily so does he 
again awaken it.’ But that connected with the slaying of Vrtra is the 
approved one. ' 0 Agni, thou purifiest lives ’ ■* is the invitatory verse of 
the second (butter-portion). ‘Thou purifiest’ is the symbol of Soma, for 
the sacrificial offering is wholly for Agni ; in that he makes mention of the 
purifying, so he departs not from the butter-portion for Soma. The 
offering and the invitatory verses are Padapanktis; the Pankti has five 
feet ; the sacrifice is fivefold ; verily (they serve) to obtain the sacrifice. 

i. 5. (The verses) are intertwined ^ (on the ground that) ‘ Intertwined as 
it were these breaths support the self.’ The whole (offering) is performed 
including the kindling verses in a low tone up to the first two after- 
offerings. After the (word) butter the discriminations are interwoven; 
further all desires are in the discriminations ; therefore they are uttered in 
a low tone, for the obtaining of all desires. Aloud he sacrifices with the 
last after-offering, aloud he utters the Suktavaka and the Qaihyorvaka.^ 
Just as a man makes to appear what is lost (saying) ‘ I have found ’, so he 
makes to appear his desires (saying) ‘ I have obtained.’ Some, however, 
perform three (parts) in a low tone, the discriminations, the second butter- 
portion, and the oblation (on the ground that), ‘ So much is there which is 
adventitious.’® The (offering) is both uttered in a low tone and uttered 
aloud ; * Agni has two forms, the expressly declared and that which is not 
expressly declared ; thereby he obtains that (characteristic) of him. Some 
make it with Agni all through, but that he should not do. The sacrificial 
fee is a bad chariot, resown, with an old wrapper, renewed, a draft ox, or 
gold, for this is a renewed ceremony. The second (offering) is for Aditi ; ® 
Aditi is a support ; verily (it serves) for support. 

* KV, ix. 66. 19. This is given as an altoma- which, indeed, is probably read by M., 

tive in ii. 2. 3. 22. Normally the though in a Grantha MS. before y con- 

second Ajyabhaga is olfered to Soma, and sonants like dh are normally doubted, 

in this indirect way the fact is hero But dgantu is uncertain in sense, and a 

reflected. Cf. Hillebrandt, pp, cit. pp. Sutra word like others in this Br&hmana. 

106, 107 ; Eggeling, SBE, xii. 318 seq* The simplest view is to take the reference 

> For the intertwining see 99^. ii. 6. 18 as to the new matter of this rite, as 

where RV. iv. 10. 1 and 3 are for the opposed to the ordinary form, which does 

oblation itself, and iv. 10. 2 and 4 for comprise precisely the three in question, 

the Sviatakrt. ^ This must be the sense here of niruktd as 

* See Hillebrandt, Nevt^und Vollmondsopfer, pp. contrasted with upan^u, Cf. KB. iii. 6. 

142 seq*j 147 seq, 5 Tho offering for Aditi breaks the predomin- 

^ The reading of both edd. etdvadkydgantfc is anceof Agni; it is put in slightly different 

clearly a blunder for etdvad dhy dgantup places in the different Sutras. 



361 ] 


The Agnihotra 


r * * 

[ 11 . 1 


ADHYAYA II 


The Agnihotra. 

ii, 1. In' that (there is performed) the Agnihotra the cauldron here is 
heated. Now he who makes heat yonder is yonder cauldron ; verily him 
thus he delights. He offers in the evening and in the morning, to Agni in 
the evening, to Surya in the morning ; the day is connected with Surya, 
the night with Agni; verily thus at the beginning he delights day and 
night. With milk should he offer ; milk is the sap of all the plants ; verily 
so with all kinds of sap he delights the fires. As to this they say : ' He 
may offer any kind of food ; all this is Agni's food ; so with their own food 
he delights the fires. Having put (it) over the Garhapatya, he should offer 
in the Ahavaniya ; the Garhapatya is the fire for cooking, the Ahavaniya 
that for offering ; therefore having put (it) over the Garhapatya, he should 
offer in the Ahavaniya. Ho makes the embers have their ends apart 
verily thus he severs these two worlds ; therefore these two worlds though 
being together are as it were separate. Now in that he lights up (the fire) 
after putting (the milk) over it, thus he makes it cooked. In that be 
brings up the waters, and the waters are complete,^ all the oblations 
become complete; verily (they serve) to complete the oblation. In that 
a second time he lights up, verily thus he cooks the waters. Thrice he 
sets down the vessel for the offering and removes it northwards,^ to 
make a threefold characteristic, for threefold is the performance for the 
gods. Without spilling® should he take (it); thus the sacrificer is not 
likely to fall into ruin. Then with the poking-stick he touches the embers 


1 The second Adhyaya deals with the Agni- 
hotra, and has a vague parallel in AB. v. 
26-31 ; cf. for the Agnihotra, and espe- 
cially the Agnyupasthana which is con- 
nected with it, TS. i. 5. 6 seq. ; KS. vi. 
9 seq. ; KapS. iv. 8 ; MS. i. 6. 1 seq. ; 5®* 
ii. 2. 8. 1 seq. For the ritual see A 9 S. ii. 
2-6 ; ggS. ii. 7-12 ; BfS. iii. 4-9 ; M 9 S. 
i. 6. 1-8 ; Ap^S. vi ; Vait. vii ; Hille- 
hrandt, RituaUitteraiur, $ 61. 

* vyantdn (which is read pr. m. in M., but with 

a correction by a later hand to dvy°) is 
Oaland's necessary correction of Lind- 
ner’s text; see VOJ. xxiii. 61 ; so the 
Anand ed. ; cf. Ap^S. vi. 5. 6 ; and often 
in BfS. e.g. iii. 6. 

* Lindner's text must be corrected, and the 


insertion of krtsnafy before krtsndni is 
easy and gives fairly good sense, Caland 
(VOJ. xxiii. 62) suggests omitting sarvani 
(as a gloss) and replacing it by hrtmaniy 
which is very good sense but a less easy 
corruption. M. has avadyotayati, 

* udag is probably not compounded with 
homiyam which must refer to the vessel 
in which the oblation is carried. 

® ucchiifidan is adopted by Lindner as explain- 
ing the variant readings of the other 
MSS. (chinnannHva ; chindant iva (M. chin- 
nant corrected to chindant)) ; it is plainly 
correct, and the sense must be as rendered. 
The Anand. has ridiculously anucchinnam 
nivaharet. 



[362 


ii. 1 — ] The Agnihotra 

on the south side (saying) ‘ Homage to the gods ! for the gods are not 
above the paying of homage. He should arrange the embers broadly; 
thus not even the outermost (of his offering) is wasted. Four times should 
he ladle out; fourfold is all this (universe); verily (it serves) for the 
obtaining of all this. Five times should he ladle out; the sacrifice is 
fivefold ; verily (it serves) to obtain the sacrifice. 

ii. 2. The settings down in the Agnihotra must" be explained. Having 
ladled out he sets down to the north of the Garhapatya ; thus he obtains 
this world. In the Ahavaniya (he sets down) for the second time when 
about to ofter ; thus he obtains the world of the atmosphere. After offering 
(he sets down) for the third time ; thus he obtains yonder world. He puts 
on a kindling stick of Butea froiidosa ; the Butea fromlosa is Soma ; this is 
the first Soma libation. It is a span in measure, for these breaths are 
a span over ^ the body. Making two finger breadths of the kindling stick 
jut over and making a knot as it were,^ he offers over it ; in two finger 
breadths of the mouth here food is placed. When it smokes, in it should he 
offer for one who desires a village ; when it flames, for one who desires 
radiance ; in the embers, for one who desires cattle. But the established 
practice is after putting it on, for then (they say) ^ all these desires are 
obtained. Having offered the two libations, he mutters * May the blessing 
of the sacrifice as successful be successful for me.* The blessing of the 
sacrifice as successful belongs to the sacrificer. He should offer the libations 
over one another ; verily thus he obtains the worlds of heaven over one 
another. He touches the embers with the base of the offering ladle ; verily 
thus he places the sacrificer in the world of heaven. Twice he holds out 
the offering ladle to the north ; verily thus having pleased Rudra in his 
own quarter he lets (him) go. Therefore one should not stand to the north 
of the offering as it is made, lest he be in the vicinity of this dread god. 
In the evening he rubs it on the north side as it points west; thus he 
makes the sun to set. In the morning (he rubs it) on the south side as it 
points upwards ; thus he leads upwards the sun. That which he rubs the 
first time he smears on the mat ; thereby he delights the plants ; in that 


' adhij the reading of M., seems the only 
possible one to be accepted. With dbhi 
the acc. sing, would be inevitable. The 
Anand. ed. has abhiprdndd, a more error. 

* The samidh above referred to must be meant : 
it is therefore impossible to render 
samidhah as plural, as apparently it is 
taken by PW. and MW. The idea is 
that in some way the two finger breadths 
of the samidh are made into an outline of 


a human mouth, as the next words clearly 
prove. The Anand. ed. has atiritya, 

’ The rule laid down is that the offering 
should be made on the samidh as soon as it 
is put on, and the reason is evidently given 
here by t<i, though no word of quotation 
of opinion is included. The term abhyd- 
dhd refers to the laying of the samidh on 
the fire, not to the placing of the offering 
on the samidh. 



353] 


[— ii. 5 


The Agnihotra 

(he rubs) the second time, he lays down his outstretched hand to the south 
of the mat ; thereby he delights the fathers. In that he twice eats by 
means of his forefinger, with the first he delights foetuses ; therefore 
though not eating, foetuses draw breath ; with the second birds ; therefore 
birds eat very multifarious ^ matter as it were, but exude what is white as 
it were. In that he eats with the offering ladle, thereby he delights what 
has been and what will be. In that he licks the offering ladle, thereby he 
delights the serpents, the god folk. In that he cleanses the offering ladle, 
thereby he delights the Raksascs, the god folk. In that he pours forth the 
waters to east and north, ^ thereby he delights the Gandharvas and the 
Apsarases. In that he directs the offering ladle to east and north,^ verily 
thus he places Rudra in his own quarter; thus with the Agnihotra he 
delights all creatures. 

ii. 3. ‘ In the Ahavaniya only should he offer * some say, but he should 
offer in all, for they are established for the offering. Four (are offered) in 
the Garhapatya, four in the Anvaharyapacana, two in the Ahavaniya ; these 
make up ten : ^ the Viraj consists of series of ten : the Viraj is prosperity 
and proper food ; (they serve) for obtaining the Viraj as prosperity and 
proper food. He who offers the Agnihotra with the Viraj thus included 
obtains all desires. 

ii. 4. In that, after offering, he pays reverence to the fires, verily thus 
having given pleasure, at the end he declares his purpose among the gods. 
In that also he touches the calf, therefore there is the hymn of Vatsapri 
thus cattle are not liable to stray away from the sacrificer. In that he 
releases his vow, after sipping water, verily in the waters he places the 
vow ; they guard his vow until his next offering. ' 

ii. 5. In ^ that when about to go on a journey or having gone on a 
journey he pays reverence to the fires, this is an address to the deity, in 

^ The reading kini ca kith cid tra, wliicli is also Rudra's quarter. The compound is found 

in M., is open to grave suspicion of the in the Sutras only, sometimes as in M^S. 

duplication of kith ca. prasrdpayanti is i. 1. 1, 12 with variants as here (Wacker- 

clearly to be read, as prasrdvayanti is an n«gol, Altind. Gramm, ii. i. 171). 

easy corruption of it. Cf. however AB. ' 9®* * quite different series of 

vi. 16 : him iva ca vai kim iva ca reto ten to make up the ViiAj. 

vikriyate. sarpadevajandn and raksodeva- ii. 4. ^ The play on vatsam spr^ati and Vdtsa- 
jandn seem best taken as appositive, not pram is quite untranslatable. The Vat- 

Dvandva, compounds. sapra is RV. x. 46. 

® The readini; of M. prdetr udiclr and below ii. 5. ' For this rite see 99^- ^ i 

praclm udtctm seems to deserve preference i- ‘h 1 seq, ; Ap9S. vi. 24, 1 seq, 

over the prdgudicir prdgudiclm of the The Mantras of the rite are in TS. i. 5. 

ordinary MSS. In the latter case we 10. 1 ; VS. i. 5, 6 ; 9®« 4. 4. 3 seq. AB. 

have been only told above udtclm, but it is vii. 12 is only vaguely similar ; cf. A 9 S, 

now rendered more precise to accord with ii. 5. 1 seq. 

the general view of the north-east as 

45 [b.O-6. 2 b ] 



ii. 5 — 1 The Agnihotra [354 

that there is a going out.^ Verily also thus he confides himself to the fires, 
and those that follow after him. 

ii. 6. In that he causes the fires to mount on the two Aranis/ and the 
two Aranis are a chariot of the gods, verily he causes them to mount on 
a chariot of the gods, and he with this chariot of the gods attains in safety 
the world of heaven. In that also he repeatedly churns out (the fire), 
thereby verily by him is the re-establishment (of the fires) obtained. 

ii. 7. All the joys that are in food, in drink, in union, verily these are 
made, together, without break, from the night. For them the sieve is the 
night ; whatever joys there are are all born of food. The gods said ‘ How 
now shall we accept these joys from one like ourselves?' They pushed 
upwards the sap of the waters ; it became the plants and the trees. They 
pushed upwards the sap of the plants and the trees : it became fruit. They 
pushed upwards the sap of fruit ; it became food. They pushed upwards 
the sap of food ; it became seed. They pushed upwards the sap of food ; 
it became man. Man here, in that he breathes out or breathes in, does not 
say by means of expiration or inspiration, ‘Thus have I breathed out or 
breathed in ' ; by speech only does he say this. Thus expiration and 
inspiration enter into speech, and become composed of speech. Again, in 
that he sees with the eye, he does not say by means of the eye, ‘Thus have 
I seen * ; by speech only does he say this. Thus the eye enters into speech, 
and becomes composed of speech. Again, in that he hears with the ear, he 
does not say by means of the ear, ‘ Thus have I heard ' ; by speech only 
does he say this. Thus the ear enters into speech, and becomes composed 
of speech. Again, in that he resolves with the mind, he does not say by 
means of the mind, ‘ Thus have I resolved ' ; by speech only does he say 
this. Thus mind enters into speech, and becomes composed of speech. 
Again, in that he touches with his limbs something pleasant or unpleasant 
to lie upon, he does not say by means of the limbs, ‘ Thus have I touched 
what is pleasant or unpleasant to lie upon ' ; by speech only does he say 
this. Thus the whole self enters into speech, and becomes composed of 
speech. That is set forth in a Rc/ ‘ Not without Indra is any form made 
pure ' ; Indra is speech ; for not without speech is any form made pure. 
He oflers in the evening (saying),^ 

ii. 8. ‘ The light is Agni, Agni is the light.' Him that is light he calls 
‘ Light ' ; he speaks the truth ; his self here, being composed of speech, 
becomes composed of truth ; the gods also are composed of truth. Again, 

* This seems the sense of the curious neuter ii. 7. ^ RV. ix, 69. 6 ; Hir, vii. 2. 

uika^am. a 99 S. ii. 9. 1 ; A 9 S. ii. 3. 16, 

1 Of. AB. vii. 7 ; 99 S. ii. 17. I seq. 



866] The Time of the Offering [ — ii. 9 

he offers with * Hail I ’ This offering of him of true offering the gods 
accept. At the head of night he speaks truth ; if indeed even henceforth 
he speaks falsely, still truth is uttered by him,^ for at the head of night he 
speaks truth. He offers in the morning (saying) ‘ The light is the sun, the 
sun is the light.’ Him that is light he calls light ; he speaks the truth ; 
his self here, being composed of speech, becomes composed of truth ; the 
gods also are composed of truth. Again, he offers with ‘ Hail I ’ This 
offering of him of true offering the gods accept. At the head of day he 
speaks truth; if indeed even henceforth he speaks falsely, still truth is 
uttered by him, for at the head of day he speaks truth. The fire here 
offers itself in the rising sun ; yonder sun, when setting, offers itself in the 
fire at evening ; the night also (offers itself) in day, the day in night ; the 
expiration also offers in inspiration, the inspiration in expiration. These 
six sacrifice themselves, each in the other ; he who knows these six in the 
sacrificer, by him even if he sacrifices not is offering made ; and if he does 
sacrifice twice is offering made by him who knows thus. If indeed even 
from a very small portion,- knowing thus, lie offers the Agnihotra, these 
two offerings of his the gods accept, and he whose (offerings) the gods once 
eat, from that time he is immortal. Composed of truth and immortality 
does he become who knows thus. Just as is the offering of a man who has 
faith as his deity, ^ who speaks tlie truth, and is full of fervour, such is the 
offering of him who, knowing thus, offers the Agnihotra. Therefore (they 
say) one knowing thus should offer the Agnihotra. 

ii. 9. ‘ Should ^ the offering be made when the sun has risen, or before 
it is risen ? ’ they debate. He who offers when the sun has risen thus offers 
hospitality to the great god when gone on a journey. He who offers when 
the sun has not risen, thus offers hospitality to the great god when close at 
hand. Therefore the offering should be made when the sun has not risen. 

1 sa yadi corresponds with the sa yadi of the discussion in AB. v. 29 which resolves 

9B. ; cf. sa yah KB. ii. 9. The sentence that the time after the rising of the 

is best begun here. sun is the proper time in tlio morn- 

* ?uhfa/, the reading of most MSS. is meaning- ing, so that the performance is daily, 

less, and the variants, of which M.Vs not only in effect once in two days. 

surufdt is the most important, render no In this version the role of the two 

help. The Anand. ed. has suri^nenevam, authorities has been curtailed, the anti> 

The reading adopted for trans. is the thesis of gods and fathers being sup- 

conjecture surefdt * sulefat, lefa, a small pressed, and as a result the kvmdrl is left 

portion. with a rather meaningless opinion. A^S. 

3 For this exception see L4vi, La doctrine du ii. 4. 24 and 99^* ^ upodayam 

sacrifice, p. 114 ; Sftyana on TS. vii. 1. 8. 2. vyunta udite vd which N&rftyana takes as 

The view of BR., that ^addhddeva is *one a threefold choice ; 9^. ii. 3. 1. 9, 86 and 

who believes in god is now generally K9®’ ^ J ^ agree with KB. Cf. 

abandoned. Weber, Ind, Stud, ii. 298-298 ; B9S. iii. 4 ; 

ii. 9. ^ There is an earlier version of this M 9 S* i. 6. 1. 8. 



ii. 9 — ] The Agnihotra [356 

Thus also declared Vi[^a9usma Vatavata, one of the men of old, when lying 
worn out, having seen these two offerings being offered at night, ^ At night 
verily they offer the two offerings/ ' For it is at night (they offer) ' he said, 
' and we shall proclaim,^ having gone to yonder world, to the fathers, and 
they will believe us in it, that the Agnihotra which used to be performed 
on successive days is now performed on one day out of two, in the night 
only/ That also declared the maiden seized of the Gandharva, ‘In the 
night verily they offer both offerings \ ‘ For it is at night (they offer) ’ she 
declared. At the twilight should he offer. Night and day are the Hood that 
takes all ; the two twilights are the fordable crossings of it ; just as a man 
may cross the flood by the two fordable crossings, so is it in that he offers 
at the twilight. Again night and day are the missile of the god that goes 
on its way eager to kill ; the two twilights are the two wings ; just as with 
wings® it may swiftly perform a journey, so is it in that he offers at the 
twilight. Again, night and day are the encircling arms of death ; just as 
a man, who is about to grasp ^ with encircling arms, may be evaded in the 
interval (between the arms), so is it in that he offers at tlie twilight. 
Kausitaki used to declare ‘ In the evening, after sunset, before the darkness, 
at this time should he offer ; this is the time of the going to the gods ; 
grasping it he reaches safely the world of heaven. In the morning, before 
sunrise, when the darkness has been smitten away, at this time should he 
offer; this is the time of the going to the gods; grasping it he reaches 
safely the world of heaven. He that at another time offers the Agnihotra, 
the dark and the dappled rend apart his Agnihotra ; the dappled is day, 


For nv eva yam we must, of course (JRAS. 
1915, pp. 498-600) read nvat rayam (a 
plurahs maiestatis). The periphrastic 
future hero lias perhaps a sense of (ixed 
Intention of future action, but Whitney, 
(Sansfc. Qramm. § 949) thinks that the 
parallel AB. passage is merely an equiva- 
lent of the future. Cf. Delbriick, Altind. 
Synt. p. 296. The comm, has Vadhavata 
(V'cTftdu) and an a v. 1. pidrhhyo, corrected 
by Benfey(GGA. 1852, p. 134) io°drbhmah- 
nah is necessary with B below for na and 
perhaps enan for enam. Oaland (VOJ. 
xxiii. 62) reads nv eva vayam, ignoring 
Aiifrecht’s previous correction (AB. p. 
442). 

3 pakfau may very possibly here mean two 
side horses, which gives excellent sense, 
while * wings ^ is rather absurd : paksa, 
however, lias not this sense for certain 
anywhere else (cf. Keith, JRAS. 1914, 


p. 1085). is generally taken with 

BR. as the wings of an army, but send 
here rather seems to bo a ‘ missile ’ and 
the pakiasl its foatliers, as wings, a view 
which of course may explain the use of 
paksaii if tliat is ‘ wings'; cf. KB. vii. 7. 
For the metaphor of the ford, cf. the 
9ailali Brahmana in Ap^S. vi. 4. 7. 

* The form parijigrahwyan (read also in M) 
cannot be correct and must be replaced 
by parijigraKlsan (desid.) or possibly 
parigrakUyan, Weber {Ind, Stud, ii. 418) 
suggests a pass. part, of the desid. with 
active termination. * and sy are con- 
stantly interchanged. 

’ For the two dogs cf. Bloomfield, JAOS. 
1893, pp. 163 ; Macdonoll, Vedic Mytho^ 

logy, j>. 173. The Anand. ed. has the 
impossible ; M. ha.s the necessary 

vikhidatah. 



367 ] 


The New and Full Moon Offerings [ — iii. i 

the dark night. He who offers in the midnight,® the dark rends apart his 
Agnihotra; he who offers in the afternoon, the dappled rends apart his 
Agnihotra. Therefore assuredly whenever he may offer he should have 
regard to the prosperity of the offering.’ 


ADHYAYA III 

The New and Full Moon Offerings. 

iii. 1. In^ that he fasts at the new and full moon it is because the gods 
do not eat the oblation of him who does not perform the fast. Therefore 
he fasts (desiring) ‘ May the gods eat my oblation ‘ On the first full moon 
(day) should he fast ’ is the view of Paingya ; ' on the second ’ that of 
Kausitaki ; ‘ that on which (the moon) appears (full) about the setting 
of the sun * is the rule ; “ he should fast on the second full moon day. 


® Here mahurdtra and mahdhna seem really to 
mean when night or day is fully sot in 
as opposed to the times decided on, which 
are to be really twilights. 

' In this Adhyaya a comparatively brief 
account of the new and full moon 
sacrilico is given ; the Mantras of the 
Adhvaryus are given in TS. i. 1 ; KS. i ; 
KapS. i ; MS. i, and the Brahmana 
elaborately in TS. i. (5 and 7 j li. 6 and 6 ; 
KS. V ; MS. i. 4; ?B. i. Of these TS. ii. 
6 . 7-11 ; 6 . 7-10, and 9 ^^- with 
a good deal of the Hotr’s functions. For 
the ritual see A9S- i» 1 » 99^* ^ 16 ; 

B9S. i ; M9S. i. 1-3 ; Ap9S. ii-iv ; VaiL 
i - iv ; IIillebrandt,iVeM- %md VoUmondsoj)/er. 
There is a corrupt version of this chapter 
in AB. vii. 11 ; cf. KS. xii. 8. 

2 The distinction between the two full moon 
days is given by 99®* ^* ^* ^ 
paryastamayam purna udiydt and yam 
cdstamiUy and of the new moon days (i. 3. 
6) as pvo na droAUti yad aha^ ca na dr^yeta. 
This distinction seems in accoid with 
that in Ap9S. (xxiv. 2. 21, 22 : yad ahal} 
purastdc candramdfy purna utsarpei tarn paur- 
rwtmCtsim upavaset, ^vah puriteti vCi ; 24, 25 : 
2 /ad ahar rui drgyeta tad ahar a?ndvasydj fvo 
na drastdra iti vd) so far as the new 
moons are concerned, but as regards the 
full moons, the relation is uncertain. 


The definition in OGS. i. 5. 10 agrees 
with <ho Brahmana as interpreted 
by Oldenberg (SBE. xxx. 26), in the 
opinion of that scholar, and Weber also 
(l/ber den Vedakaknder, p. 62) treats tlie 
Br&hinana as agreeing with the 99 ®* 
Yet, as is clear, the Brahmana as it 
stands makes the second the day on which 
the moon appears full about sunset, 
while the Siitras make that day the first. 
This discrepancy suggests that it is quite 
probable that the second set, the new 
moons, do not correspond with those of 
the Sutras either, and in point of fact it 
seems natural to hold that pro na dtastd 
cannot be paralhded by anirjndya purastdd 
amdvdsydydm candiamasam which is rather 
yad ahat; cana drpjeta. The Brahmana in 
fact would put its days each one day 
further back or on than the Sutras. The 
only way to produce agreement with the 
Sutras would be to assume that yam 
paryastamayam utsarpet is either misplaced 
or a mere gloss, or less probably that it 
explains the Paiiigyan view, the con- 
clusion beginning with $d sthiti)^, purastdt 
is difficult, possibly it = before tho sun- 
set, not before the next day (cf. SBE. xxx. 
333). ‘ In the east ’ is, however, alone 
probable ; in Atharvaprdyagdtta, ii. 2, it 
seems to have this sense, and the same 



[368 


iii. 1 — ] The New and Full Moon Offerings 

InHhat he fasts on the new moon day not discerning the moon in the east, 
thereby he delights the first (new moon day) ; in that he sacrifices, thereby 
the second. He should fast on the second ; on the second the ocean swells 
in accordance with the moon, its deity. The moon is the truth of the gods ; 
therefore should he fast on the second. 

iii. 2. In that before the kindling verses he mutters, verily thus he makes 
a benediction. After uttering the sound hifi he repeats the kindling verses ; 
the sound hin is a thunderbolt ; verily thus with a thunderbolt he smites 
the misfortune of the sacrificer. Three times he utters the sound hin ; the 
thunderbolt is threefold ; verily thus he produces a thunderbolt. By this 
threefold thunderbolt the gods drov e away the Asuras from these worlds, 
and verily so the sacrificer with this threefold thunderbolt drives away the 
enemies who hate him from these worlds. He repeats eleven kindling 
verses; the Tristubh has eleven syllables; Indra is connected with the 
Tristaibh; thus both Indra and Agni he obtains. The first he thrice 
repeats, the last thrice ; they make up fifteen ; tlie days of the first and the 
second halves of the month are fifteen ; thus by the kindling verses he 
obtains the first and the second halves of the month. Again, the kindling 
verses arc a thunderbolt ; the thunderbolt is fifteenfold ; verily thus by 
a thunderbolt he smites the misfortune of the sacrificer. In that (he 
repeats) the first thrice and the last thrice, verily thus he ties the two ends 
of the sacrifice for firmness and to avoid slipping. There are three hundred 
and sixty syllables in these (verses) ; three hundred and sixty are the days 
of the year ; thus by tlie kindling verses he obtains the days of the year. 
They are Gayatri verses ; Agni is connected with the Gayatri, and has the 
Gayatri as his metre ; verily thus he praises Agni with liis own metre. 
They are appropriate ; what in the sacrifice is appropriate is perfect ; 
verily (they serve) for the perfection of the sacrifice. With the om in the 
third uttering of the last (verse) he connects the address, ‘ O Agni, thou 
art great, O Brahmana, O Bharata Agni is Bharata ; he bears (bharati) 
the oblation to the gods. In tliat he utters the Rsi descent ^ of the sacri- 


sense appears in KB. iv. 2. In his com- 
mentary on AB. vii. 11 Sayana renders 
‘in the eastern quarter ^ The double 
kind of amdvdsyd and paunmmnsl may 
reflect a confusion of dating due to the 
alternative cominonccment of day with 
night or morning; cf. Hirt, Die Indo- 
germaneny ii. 540 with Fleet, JRAS. 1915, 
p. 218 ; Keith, 1916, pp. 148-146. Tho 
version in AB. has tho term iiihiy which 
alone would show that the passage is 
corrupt, as the iithi is an idea wholly 


unknown to any text earlier than the 
Sutras and is there mainly a late passage 
of the Gfhya Sutrcis, 

^ Agni of the Bharatas is clearly meant, but 
the misunderstanding is obviously very 
old, and perhaps deliberate. Cf. Mac- 
donell and Keith, Vedic IndeXy ii. 96 seq. 

3 See Weber, Ind. Stud* ix. 823 ; Hillebrandt, 
Ntu- und Vollmondsop/ery p. 81, n, 1. 99®’ 

i. 4, 15-18 requires three ancestors to be 
cited, or six in the case of a son of two 
Gotras (an adopted son) ; if the sacri- 



f ••• 

[ — 111 . 1 


369] The Summoning of the Deities 


ficer, it is because the gods do not eat the oblation of one who has not 
descent from a Rsi. Therefore he utters his descent from a Rsi. He con- 
nects the address of fifteen elements ; it is the Nivid ^ of the kindling verses ; 
therefore has it fifteen elements ; for the kindling verses are fifteen. It is 
not in metre ; all this is twofold, metrical and not in metre ; (he says it 
thinking), ‘ With all this let me praise Agni/ Having connected seven 
elements he should stop ; the metres are seven ; verily (they serve) to obtain 
all the metres. Then (come) four, then four ; all this is fourfold ; verily 
(they serve) to obtain all this. 

iii. 3. In ^ that he summons the deities severally, it is because the obla- 
tions are taken separately for them. In that he summons Agni through 
Agni, the form of Agni which bears the oblation is his sacrificial form. It is 
what there over yonder sun shines like light ; therefore the sun (appears) to 
every man. Thus in that he says ‘ O Agni bring Agni verily thus he 
says 'That (form) bring.’ In that he invites the gods that drink the 
butter, thus he invites the fore^offerings and the after-oflTerings. In that 
he invites Agni for the Hotr s function, thus he invites the Svistakrt (offer- 
ing). In that he invites his own greatness, thus he invites Vayu ; Agni’s 
own greatness is Vayu, for by him ho acquires and attains greatness. In 
that he recites by order, and sacrifices by order, thereby verily sacri- 
fice is made to his own greatness. ‘ Bring, O All-knower, and offer with 
good sacrifice (with those words) ho says to him, ' Bring the gods, 0 All- 
knower, and oflfer to the gods with good sacrifice.’ In that he mutters before 
the kindling verses, and the kindling verses are a thunderbolt, verily thus 
he appeases him both before and after. In that he takes up the two ladles 
with the verse for taking up the ladles,^ verily thus he yokes a chariot of 
the gods, being about to bestow the oblation upon the gods. With this 
chariot of the gods he attains safely the world of heaven, 

iii. 4. He ^ offers the fore-offerings. The fore-offerings are the seasons ; 
verily thus he delights the seasons. They are five ; with them he obtains 
whatever there is fivefold pertaining to the self’ or to the gods. He ofiers 
to the kindling sticks ; verily (thus he delights) the spring ; in the spring all 


ficer is not a Brahman then tlie Hotr’s 
ancestors may be named, or in all case^ 
manava may be used. 

* The filtoen pada character of the Nivid 
must be made up by tlie use of some 
addition. v. 1. 4. 12 has mdnutay 

giving fifteen syllables, and TB. iii. 5. 3. 1 
asdv asau^ The fifteen additional words 
are given in sets of 7, 4, and 4, in 
i. 4. 19-21. 

^ For the devatdndm dvdhana see 9?®. i. 


4. 22 seq , ; Hillebrandt, p. 84. The Sandhi 
m dmin djyapan is due to quotation of 
the words of the summons. 

* The phrase is found also in 95®* •• 22 ; 

the micau are the juMi and the upabhrt ; 
cf. A 9 S. ii. 2. 4 ; Hillebrandt, p. 85. 
The veise is given in 99®- 
precedes the fore-offerings. 

iii. 4. * For the five fore-offerings see 95®* 
i. 7 ; Hillebrandt, pp. 96-101. yaj is 
strictly *= ‘ say the offering verse for 



[360 


iii. 4—1 The New and Full Moon Offerings 

this is kindled. He ofiera to Tanunapat; verily (thus he delights) the hot 
season, for the hot season heats the body. He offers to the sacrificial food ; 
verily (thus he delights) the rains, for through the rains sacrificial food 
arises. He offers to the strew : verily (thus he delights) the autumn, for 
in the autumn the plants on the strew grow best. He offers at the end 
to the making of Hail ! ; verily (thus he delights) the winter, tor in the 
winter over all this is Hail ! made. They say ‘ Seeing that there are five 
fore^offerings and six seasons, where does he offer to the sixth season ? In 
that in the fourth fore-offering he mingles (the butter),* thus he gives it 
a share in the others. Again, in that in the last fore-offering he mixes 
together the gods, he makes them sharers in the fore-offerings. Just as 
Agni has a share in all oblations, so he makes the deities sharers in the 
share of Agni. Ho does not say liere ® ‘ Agni from the Hoty’s office ’ (think- 
ing), ‘The fore-offerings arc cattle; the Svistakrt is Rudra; let me not 
bring the cattle of the sacrifice into contact with Rudra.’ Some* say 
‘Hail! May the gods, drinking the butter, rejoicing, O Agni, enjoy this 
butter.’ He should not so do. The butter is one half of the sacrifice, the 
oblation is the other half ; if he were to say one only of these, then one 
half of the sacrifice would have an accompaniment, the other half not. 
Therefore he should say ‘ Hail ! May the gods, drinking the butter, rejoic- 
ing, O Agni, enjoy this butter, this oblation.’ 

iii. 5. In' that the butter portions at the full moon offering contain 
references to the slaying of Vrtra, it is because Indra slew Vrtra with the 
full moon offering. In that they have references to growth at the new moon 
offering, it is because then the moon becomes destroyed and verily thus 
does he cause it to swell up and to increase The offering verses in these 
offerings contain the word ‘ rejoicing ’, for they include the same oblations 
as the fore-offerings. Now ‘rejoicing’ is the holy power; verily thus by 
the holy power he offers the oblation to the gods. These offerings are 
threefold, ye yajainahe, the Nigada, the sound vasat * ; the butter portions 


* This refers to the putting of butter from 

the upahhrt into the juhu ; see i. 

16 ; Hillebrandt, p, 9i, n. 4. 

* This is a reference to the form of the Mantra 

given in MS. iv. 10. 3 and it confirms 
von Schroeder's reading there of hotrdt 
for the erroneous hotrdn of the MSS. The 
Pratika lias been overlooked in the Vedic 
Concordance ] cf. also TB. iii. 6. 2. 2. 

* This form is found in MS. iv. 10. 3 ; 18. 5, 

vfhich is doubtless (as in n. 8) the text 
referred to; KS. xv. 13; VS. xxviii. 11 
lias indra for agm. 


* This section deals with the two butter 

portions which differ in their formation 
at new and full moon, the verses used 
being RV. viii. 44. 12 and vi. 16. 34 
respectively ; see 99®* ® » Hillebrandt, 

pp. 102 seq. 

* The Nigada is the material part in the 

offering verse, which runs in A 9 S. i. 6. 
34 : ye 8 yajdmaha agnim agnir jusana 
djyasya xetu 3 vau 3 sat. The rules for 
Pluti in the sacrifice are given by 99®* 
i. 2. 2 seq.f who gives as the Nigada Jiavi^ 
safy as well as above in KB. iii. 4 ad Jin, 



361 ] 


f • • • 

[ — 111 . 6 


The Principal Oblations 

are the eye ; the eye is threefold, white, black, and red. These offerings he 
does not perforin in the animal or Soma sacrifice (thinking), ‘ Through the 
animal offering the Soma sacrifice is possessed of eyes ; let me not make 
the sacrifice four-eyed and loathsome/ In that the invitatory verses 
contain the words ‘ to * and ‘ offeredV^ and the offering verses the words ‘ for- 
ward that is, ‘ given \ verily thus having sacrificed he gives the oblation to 
the gods. These (verses) are Gayatri and Tristubh ; the Gayatri is the holy 
power ; the Tristubh is lordly power ; verily thus with the holy and lordly 
power lie gives the oblation to the gods. So great is the extension of 
the metre ; verily thus with the whole extension of the metre he 
gives the oblation to the gods. At the end of the Rc he utters 
the sound vasat ; so do all his offering verses become beautiful. With sat 
he utters vasat ; the seasons are six ; verily thus he pleases the seasons. 
He should utter vasat as connected with the Brhat and the Rathantara,* 
with a long in front and short behind ; the short is the Rathantara, tlie long 
the Brhat ; again, the Rathantara is this (earth) ; the Brhat is yonder (sky) ; 
verily thus in these two he finds support. So great is the extension of 
speech ; verily thus with the whole extension of speech he gives the obla- 
tion to the gods. ‘ bhur blmvah ’ * he mutters before ye yajamahey ‘ Strengtli 
is might, might is strength ; light ’ after the sound vasat : the sound vasat is 
a thunderbolt; verily thus he quietens it, both in front and behind. 
Strength and might are the two most dear forms of the sound vasat ; verily 
with them he quietens it. 

iii. 6. In ^ that he offers to Agni first of the deities, and because Agni is the 
mouth (beginning) of the gods, verily thus at the beginning he delights 
the gods. Now as to his sacrificing to Agni and Soma at the full moon 
offering, Agni and Soma were within Vrtra; witli regard to them Indra 
could not hurl his bolt ; for them he arranged the portion at the full moon 

a-hxitah occurs in RV. vi 16. 31 ; pm, here (2) an Upari(;uyaja ; (3) a cake for Indra 

explained as it seems by pratta, only in and Agni or a milk offering (Saiiinayya) 

the Yajyas of the main offering to Indra for Indra. In the case of the second alter- 

and Agni, RV. i. lOtl. 6 and at the native under (3) the Sarhnayya is divided 

Samnayya, x. 180. 1. into two parts by the extension of the 

* Of. Anartlya on 95®* 2. 18, where this Upah 9 uyaja. Tliis is in general accord 

sentence is cited by Suyajfia, the reputed with 95®* i* 13-18 which, however, is less 

author, vasat is to be made vau j saL explicit as to the position of the Upah- 

® See 95®* standing rule of 9 «yaia and which specifies the duties of 

the use of tliis formula. the Upahvuyajas as Agni and Soma nor- 

^ This chapter deals with the chief oblation mally, but in the case of no Sariinayya 

(prad^dna^arm«) of the tw'o sacrifices ; as Visnu. The other Sutras agree generally, 

here treated they clearly are for the full but vary in detail ; see Hillebrandt, pp. 

moon (1) a cake for Agni ; (2) an Upah^u- 111-115. The last paragraph of thechapter 

yaja ; (,3) a cake for Agni and Soma , for deals with the offering to Agni Svis^akrt. 

the new moon (1) a cake for Agni ; 

46 [h.O.S. 26] 



iii. 6 -] The New and Full Moon Offerings [362 


sacrifice ; the two are offered to inaudibly, and in a higher tone, to prevent 
sameness. In that he sacrifices inaudibly, thereby he delights Soma; in 
that (he sacrifices) in a higher tone, thereby (he delights) Agni. In that he 
sacrifices to Indra and Agni at the new moon sacrifice, it is because Indra 
and Agni are supports ; verily (the offering serves) for a support. In that, 
mingling, he sacrifices to Indra at the new moon sacrifice, that is the light of 
the new moon sacrifice, for the moon is not then seen. In that, without 
mingling,* he offers the butter of the inaudible (sacrifice) between the two 
cakes, it is for preventing sameness. In that, mingling, he offers the butter 
of the inaudible (sacrifice) in the midst of the milk offering (tiamndyyu), 
the explanation of that has been given.® In that he sacrific&s at the end 
to Agni Svistakrt, it is because he gives the oblation to the gods ; he who 
divides out food tastes it himself last. Again Svistakrt is Kudra and he 
enjoys at the end. Therefore to him at the end he sacrifices. In that 
(offering) the invitatory and offering verses are of the same metre, but the 
Nigada differs; though this sameness is avoided. After saying vasat, he 
touches water ; the waters are healing and medicine ; verily thus are 
healing and medicine produced at the end in the sacrifice. 

iii. 7. In ' that he smears on the lower lip the first anointing of the sacri- 
ficial food on the forefinger, the lower lip is this world, the upper lip is 
yonder world, what is between the lips is the atmosphere here : therefore 
in that he eats, verily thus he delights these worlds continuously. In that 
he invokes the sacrificial food, verily thus he seeks renown among all 
beings. Again, the sacrificial food is food ; verily thus he places food in 
himself ; again the sacrificial food is cattle ; verily (the invocation) serves 
to obtain cattle. On it four times he breathes ; all this (universe) is four- 
fold ; verily (it serves) to obtain all this (universe). Again, in that after 
invoking the sacrificial food he smells it and the sacrificial food is cattle, 
verily thus he confers cattle upon himself. Again, in that the Adhvaryu 
makes the cake to sit on the strew, verily thus he delights the fathers. 
Again, in that he eats the second * portion of the sacrificial food with 


* *samnayan is tho toclinical torm which ex- 

presses the '..ontral act of the Samnayya 
or offering of milk to Indra. 

* I. e. it is to avoid sameness, as in tlie case of 

the iiiteryentioii of the offering between 
the two cakes. 

* This chapter gives explanation of the details 

of the invocation of the sacrificial food 
(idd), for which sec* i. 10, 11 ; Hille- 
brandt, pp. 126 seq. Then came notes on 
the anv&h&ryaf a mess of food cooked witli 
rice which is the fee for the priests and 


tho recitation over tlie kindling stick 
which is prescribed in 99^. i. 12. 

^ uttaredd (^also in KB. xiii, 7) is the portion 
of the Hotr of the five portions into 
which the idd proper is divided. It may 
be called * second ^ as being the second 
part cut, or, because it is held in the 
left hand, perhaps < left ^ is meant ; cf. 
x^nartiya on 99S. i. 10. 4. Tho AB. has 
avdnfaredd ; see Weber, Ind. Stud. ix. 225, 
226 ; Ags. ii. 9. 7. 



363 ] 


The After-Offerings 


[ — iii. 8 


muttering, and the muttering is the holy power ; verily thus with the holy 
power he appeases it. Again, in that they cleanse themselves on that 
(part of the strew) where the strainers are, and the waters are healing and 
medicine, verily thus at the end in the sacrifice are healing and medicine 
made. Again, in that they bring up the mess of food, it is because the new 
and full moon sacrifices have that as the sacrificial fees; therefore they 
bring up the mess of food. Again, in that he addresses ® the kindling 
stick, it is because it alone is left over of the kindling fuel ; therefore he 
celebrates it. 

iii. 8. In ^ that he ofters three after-offerings, and these worlds are three, 
verily thus he obtains these worlds. In that he says all last, and the 
Svistakrt is a support, verily (it serves) for a support. In that he says 
the Suktavaka, and the Suktavaka is a support, verily (it serves) for 
a support. In that he makes mention of earth and sky, and earth and sky 
are supports, verily (it serves) for a support. Some say ‘Agni hath 
rejoiced in this oblation ’. This he should not do the deity to whom he 
is sacrificing comes forward thinking ‘ It is a renewed sacrifice ; again will 
he give me the oblation ’, and takes away the blessings of the sacrificer ; 
therefore ‘ He hath rejoiced in oblation, he hath rejoiced in oblation ’ 
only should he say. The deities to whom he sacrifices in the beginning, 
verily in the end through them he finds support. In that in the Suktavaka 
ho mentions the name “ of the sacrificer, it is because it is the divine self of 
the sacrificer which the priests make ready ; therefore he mentions his 
name ; for here is he born. He should mention it aloud, even if he be 
a teacher ; thus is the sacrificer not likely to fall into ruin. Five * blessings 
he utters ; there are three in the sacrificial food ; they make up eight ; by 
them the gods attained all attainments (istlli ) ; verily thus does the sacri- 
ticer by means of them attain all attainments. Having placed his clasped 
hands pointing east on the strew he mutters ‘ For homage ’, for the gods 
are not superior to homage. In that he says the Qlamyuvaka, and the 
gamyuvaka is a support, verily (it serves) for a support ; again (^amyu 
Barhaspatya appeased all sacrifices ; therefore he utters the ^amyuvaka. 

* The Andiid. ed. has anuynmitrayeta. But the god's name is apparently also to 

^ This chapter briefly touches on the three be omitted contrary to 99 S. unless wo 

after -offerings and the Suktavaka and the are to understand that merely idam i> to 

^atiiyuvaka, which here is called he rejected, as is reasonable, 

yorvaka and attributed to (}simy\i Bar- * namam has ^Snkhayana, explained as the 

haspatya ; see 99®- 12, 13-14. 24; personal and Nftki^tra name ; see Hille- 

Hillebrandt, pp. 134-149. brandt, p. 146, n, 1. 

* The point is tdfam, which is found witliaf/ntV * Viz. ntiardm devayajydm hhiiyah haviskaranam 

in TS, ii. 6. 9. 6 ; TB. iii. 6. 10. 2 ; MS. iv, dyuh suprajdsfvam divyam dhdma, 95®* 

13. 9 (cf. MS V. 1. 4. 28) ; 9 B. i. 9. 1. 9 14. 17. 

and even in A 9 S. i. 9. 1 (without 



[364 


iii. 8 — ] The Neio and Full Moon Offerings 


In that he touches the waters, and the waters are healing and medicine, 
verily thus at the end in the sacrifice are healing and medicine produced. 

iii. 9. In ^ that they perform in the Garhapatya the sacrifices to the wives 
with (the gods), the wives share the Garhapatya, the sacrificer the Ahavaniya; 
therefore they perform the sacrifices for the wives with (the gods) in the 
Garhapatya. They are four in number; up to four (degrees), are pairing, 
union, propagation ; (they serve) for generation.^ They are performed 
inaudibly ; the sacrifices to the wives with (the gods) are a pouring of seed ; 
inaudibly is seed poured ; they are appropriate ; what in the sacrifice is 
appropriate is perfect ; verily (they serve) for the perfection of the sacri- 
fice. He sacrifices to Soma, Tvastr, the wives of the gods; and Agni, lord 
of the house; these deities are the controllers of unions; them here 
he delights ; they here being delighted confer unions. To Soma first he 
sacrifices ; thus he pours seed ; to Tvastr second, Tvastr transmutes the 
seed that is poured ; then to the wives, for these are joint sacrifices for the 
wives ; in that he sacrifices last to Agni, lord of the house, the wives are 
those of him that makes the sacrifice well performed ; therefore he sacrifices 
to him at the end. In that he mutters the Rc, verily thus he procures 
a blessing. In that he invokes the sacrificial food, in that he purifies him- 
self, in that he utters the (^amyuvaka, the explanation of that has been 
given.® In that he causes the wife to speak on the grass bundle, and the 
grass bundle is male and the wife female, verily thus he confers union upon 
women ; therefore the wife puts between her thighs blades of the grass 
bundle. In that he strews the grass bundle, thereby the new and full 
moon offerings are continued by him ; verily also thereby the strew for his 
Agnihotra is spread. In that he pays reverence to the remnant of the grass 
bundle, verily thus he utters a prayer for blessing ; in that he pays rever- 
ence to the Ahavaniya, verily thus having delighted (them) he speaks at 


* This chapter deals with the four Patnlsam- 
yajas, which appear to be offerings to the 
gods including the wives of the gods, 
being really offerings to Soma, Tvastr, 
and Agni, and one to the wives ; see 99’^* 
i. 15. 1-8 ; Hillebrandt, pp. 161 seq. Then 
come references to the muttering of a Kc 
(iv. 12. 6) ; the invocation of the sacrificial 
food ; the cleansing ; the ; 

the speech of the sacrificer^a wife while 
standing on the grass bundle ; the spread- 
ing of the bundle of grass ; the reverence 
of the remnant of the bundle and of the 
Ahavaniya ; and the touching of water, 
for which see 99^* *• ^-18* Hille- 

brandt, pp. 162 seq. 


2 Possibly the four nouns express the four 
things exemplified in the four sacrifices, 
the dative in tlie last case being natural 
enough ; it is also possible to stop at 
mifhunam and make prajananam prajdtyai 
the description of the effort of the four, 
but in that case eva would be expected. 
More probable, however, is the version of 
the text ; cf. MS. i. 7. 3 ; Schol. on Pan. 
viii 1. 16 ; the reference may be to the 
limits of human marriage ; cf. 9 B. i. 8. 8. 6, 
a being exclusive (cf. AB. iv. 24), not 
animal mating. Possibly it only means a 
pair union, and propagation make up four ; 
cf. viii. 2, n. 6. 

I. e. in iii. 7 and 8. 



366] Special Sacrijices [ — ^iv. 2 

the end his purpose to the gods ; in that he touches the waters, and the 
waters are healing and medicine, verily thus at the end in the sacrifice are 
healing and medicine produced. 


ADHYAYA IV 


• Special Sacrijices. 


iv. 1. By ^ means of the supplementary offering the gods smote away the 
Asuras; verily so also does the sacrificer by the supplementary offering 
smite away the foes that hate him. He offers to Indra, driver away of 
enemies, a cake on eleven potsherds. Indra is the smiter away of enemies ; 
verily he smites away his enemies. Again, he adds on the new moon cere- 
monial. In that at the full moon sacrifice he offers to Indra, therein the 
sacrificer has the new and full moon sacrifices completed ^ ; if he were to 
incur a disaster in the second half of the month, there would not be a dragging 
apart of his sacrifice. In that in the new moon sacrifice ho offers to Aditi, 
it is to balance the sacrifice. From the invitatory and offering verses it is 
possessed of the characteristic of driving away enemies.^ 

iv. 2. Next ^ as to the Abhyudita sacrifice. He wanders from the path of 
the sacrifice at whose fast the moon is seen in the east. He offers to Agni, 
the giver, a cake on eight potsherds ; Agni is the giver ; verily he gives the 
sacrifice to him. (He offers) to Indra, the bestower, curds milked in the 
evening ; Indra is the bestower ; verily he bestows the sacrifice upon him. 
(He offers) to Visnu Qipivista ^ a pap in milk milked in the morning; Visnu 
is the sacrifice ; verily he gives to him the sacrifice. In that he sacrifices 
to these deities, (it is because he thinks) ‘ Let me not wander from the path 
of the sacrifice.’ The sacrificial fee is a bow with three arrows ; that is 
a symbol of a safe journey. 


^ This chapter deals with a special variant of 
the new and full moon sacrifices, the 
Anunirvapya Isti, dtdails of which occur 
in 99 s. iii. 1. TJie chief features are 
offerings to Indra and Aditi at the end 
of the full and new moon rites respec- 
tively, the rites being based on the new 
and full moon rites. 

* The ordinary offerings may end with a milk 

offering to Indra. 

* The samydjyds of the offering to Vaimrdha 

are used for the Svistakrt in the offering 
after the new moon offering to Aditi 
which is thus connected with vtmrdh. 


The Anand. od. lias absurdly sarhydjyd 'io. 

iv. 2. ' Tliis clia]>ter (cf. Atharvaprdyafcittay ii. 
2 and 3) deals with the case wlien a new 
moon offering is begun before the actual 
time acc. to 99®. iii. 2, purastdt presum- 
ably meaning ‘ before new moon and in 
lii. 3 pafcdt ‘ after new moon \ But tlie ter- 
minology of the Br&hrnana can hardly be 
so interpreted and the sense seems to be 
as above ; cf. KB. iii. 1. The distinction 
is thus one of degree of lateness, as sugges- 
ted by the expression ahhyud in both cases. 

* For this epithet see Keith, Taittirlya Samhitd, 
p. 622, n. 8. 



iv. 3—] 


[366 


Special Sacrijices 

iv. 3. Next ^ as to the Abhyuddpsta sacrifice. He wanders from the path 
of the sacrifice at whose fast the moon is seen in the west. He offers to 
Agni, maker of paths, a cake on eight potsherds ; Agni is the maker of paths ; 
verily he sets him again ^ on the path of the sacrifice. To Indra, slayer of 
Vi'tra, (he offers a cake) on eleven potsherds; Indra is the slayer of Vrtra; 
verily he sets him again on the path of the sacrifice. To Vai 5 vanara (he 
offers a cake) on twelve potsherds ; he who yonder gives heat is Vai 5 vanara ; 
verily he sets him again on the path of the sacrifice. In that he sacrifices 
to these deities, (it is because he thinks) ‘ Let me not wander from the path 
of the sacrifice/ The sacrificial fee is a pair of shoes and a staff ; that is 
the symbol of fearlessness 

iv. 4. Next as to the Daksayana sacrifice.^ He who means to proceed with 
the Daksayana sacrifice begins on the full moon night in the Phalgunis ; 
the full moon night in the Phalgunis is the beginning of the year ; therefore 
on it the proceedings of the unconsecrated are begun. Now Daksa Parvati, 
liaving sacrificed with this sacrifice, obtained all desires ; in that he sacri- 
fices with the Daksayana sacrifice, verily (it serves) for the obtaining of all 
desires. He should not take pleasure in eating ‘ Soma, the king, the moon 
I eat', thus thinking in his mind should he cat; now the moon is Soma, 
the king, the wise ; it on the second half of the month the gods press out. 
In that on the second half of the month he performs the vows of the 
Daksayana sacrifice, (it is because he wishes) ' Let me share in the Soma 
drinking of the gods.' In that during the fast day he offers a cake on 
eleven potsherds to Agni and Soma, thereby he obtains the victim for 

^ This chapter deals with the case where the so called (umavdsya) ; day before now 

new moon sacrifice commences after the moon, the usual offerings of a cake to 

new moon acc. to iii. 3. The MSS. Agni and a cake to Indra and Agni ; (4) 

vary between ^drstd and °(irastd, new moon, a cake to Agni and payasyd 

* apipdthayaii is clearly the correct term, and for Mitra and Varuna ; see 99®* 

is read by the Anand. od. ; tlio variants which has a further offering for the 

abhipdtftayah and apipdtay at i both pointing steeds, here ignored. The Daksayana is 

to it. also dealt with by Hillebrandl, Neu- und 

iv. 4. ^ This important offering is to be per- Vollmondsopfery pp. 177-185 ; cf. Eggeling, 

formed for fifteen years or every year ac- SBE. xii. 371 seq. 

cording to 9ankhayana, taking the place 2 dpeti, which Lindner reads, is wrong ; the 
of the new and lull moon offerings of dpayita of M (dpaiti other MSS.) is the 

which it is an elaborated variant. It is a correct reading which the scribes have 

substitute for the Sattras of the Soma misunderstood. The Sutra i^iii. 8. 14) has 

sacrifices with which in this chapter its na sauMtyam prdpnuydt which shows what 

details are equated. The offerings are (1) it read. The Anand. ed. has dpayah. 

day before full moon, the usual full moon ’The ordinary rite has an upavasatha day 
offerings including cakes to Agni and Agni before the actual offering day. This rite 

and Soma ; (2) full moon, cake to Agni has for that day a special peiformance 

and milk for Indra, which of course is the of the ordinary offerings, giving up the 

usual new moon offering and hence is here next day to the special offering.s. 



367] The Ddksayana and other Sacrijices [ — iv. 7 

Agni and Soma which is offered on the fast day of the Soma (sacrifice). 
In that he sacrifices in the morning with the new moon offerings, and the 
pressing day is Indra^s, thus he obtains the pressing day. In that at the 
new moon offering on the fast day he offers a cake on twelve potsherds 
to Indra and Agni and the third pressing belongs as regards its Saman to 
Indra and Agni, thus he obtains the third pressing. In that there is 
a milk mess for Mitra and Varuna, and the offering (of a cow) is for Mitra 
and Varuna, thus he obtains the offering of a cow. Thus Soma is present, 
having penetrated the Haviryajnas ; therefore though unconsecrated he 
performs the vows of the consecrated. 

iv. 5. Next ^ as to the Idadadha sacrifice. He who means to proceed with 
the Idadadha sacrifice begins on the same full moon night ; the explanation 
of it has been given. It is a sacrifice for one desiring cattle or desiring 
proper food. With it should one desiring cattle or one desiring proper food 
sacrifice ; verily in it thus also does he perform the vows, for it is a com- 
bination of the Daksayana sacrifice. 

iv. (). Next ^ as to the Sarvaseni sacrifice. He who means to proceed with 
the Sarvaseni sacrifice begins on the same full moon night ; the explanation 
of it has been given. It is a sacrifice for one desiring propagation; with it 
should one desiring propagation sacrifice. In that the Adhvaryu produces 
the oblation, that is the symbol of propagation. 

iv. 7. Next ’ as to tlie (^aunaka sacrifice. Ho who means to proceed with 
the Qaunaka sacrifice begins on the same full moon night ; the explanation 
of this has been given. It is a sacrifice for one desiring to lay low (his 
enemies) ; with it should one desiring to lay low sacrifice ; he who desires 
‘May I lay low the rival who hates me\ should sacrifice with this; 
he lays him low indeed. 


* According to 99^* ^ ^oiir days iiave 

the following offerings, (1) cako for 
Agni, pap for Sarasvati ; (2) cake for 
Agni and Soma with the Upaii9uylija, 
and milk for Indra ; (8) cake for Agni, 
pap for Sarasvant; (4) cake for Indra 
and Agni, and milk mess for Mitra and 
Varuna. He adds the vdjina offerings as 
in the D&ks&yana. The sacrifice is just 
mentioned in AB. iii 40. 9 ; A9S. ii. 14. 
11 ; Ap9S. iii. 17. 12. 

iv. 6. ^ According to 99®* *^^* 19 the point of 
distinction in this rite is the combination 
of the new and full moon offerings at full 
moon and their omission in toto at new 
moon. Cf. AB. iii. 40. 7 ; A9S. ii. 14. 


7-10 ; 9B. ii. 4. 4. 4 ; xi. 1. 2 ; ApCS. iii. 
17 . 12 . 

iv. 7. ^ According to 99®- ^9. 7 there is no 

distinction in tliisca^ofortheHotrascom- 
parod with the normal model. Anartlya 
points out that the Anunirvapyas are to 
be performed in this case, and that the 
rule of prakrti and vikdra which usually 
holds is not applicable to these rites. Cf. 
Ap9S. iii. 17. 12. The mention of 
9aunaka is probably a piece of evidence 
for the later date of the KB., as the 
family appears to have been prominent 
in the late Brahmana epoch, as indicated 
by the citations in Vedic Index, ii. 390. 



[368 


iv. 8 — ] Special Sacrifices 

iv. 8. Next ^ as to the Vasistha sacrifice. He who means to proceed with 
the Vasistha sacrifice begins on the new moon in the Phalgunis (thinking) 
‘ The full moon night is the holy power ; the new moon night is the lordly 
power ; this sacrifice is, as it were, the lordly power. By means of the 
lordly power let me overcome my foes.’ Vasistha desired, when his sons 
were slain, ‘ May I be propagated with offspring, with cattle, may I over- 
come the Saudasas.’ He saw this sacrificial rite, the Vasistha sacrifice ; 
he grasped it and sacrificed with it; having sacrificed with it, he was 
propagated with offspring, with cattle; he overcame the Saudasas. Verily 
thus also the sacrificer, in that he sacrifices with the Vasistha sacrifice, 
is propagated with offspring, with cattle; he overcomes the rivals who 
hate him. 

iv. 9. Next^ as to the Sakamprasthayya sacrifice. He who means to 
proceed with the Sakamprasthayya begins on the same new moon night ; 
the explanation of it has been given. It is a sacrifice for one desiring 
pre-eminence, desiring heroism ; with it should one desiring pre-eminence, 
desiring heroism, sacrifice. In that together they move forward, together 
they sacrifice, together they eat, therefore is it called Sakamprasthayya 
(moving forward together). 

iv 10. Next ^ as to the Munyayana. He who means to proceed with the 
Munyayana begins on the same full moon night ; the explanation of it has 
been given. It is a sacrifice for one desiring all ; with it should one desiring 
all sacrifice. 

iv. 11. Next' as to the Turayana. He who means to proceed with the 
Turayana begins on the same full moon night ; the explanation of this has 
been given. It is a sacrifice for one desiring heaven ; with it should one 


* According to ***• offering 

follows the model of tin? Sarvasoiii 
sacrifice, but with all the offerings com- 
bined on the new moon, instead of the 
full moon as in that case. For Vasistha 
and the death of his sons see TS. vii. 4. 
7. 1 ; Muir, OST. i.* * 328 ; Macdonell and 
Keith, Vedic Index, li. 276. Cf. Ap^S. 
iii. 17. 12. 

iv. 9. ^ Like the ^^unaka sacrifice (iv. 7) this 
is discussed in 99^* iu* 7 as being like 
the new and full moon offerings. 

iv. 10. * According to 99^* 7 -10 the 

sacrificer sacrifices to Agni and Agni and 
Visnu every time save at the Parvan, i.o. 
the new and full moon offering, the four 
monthly offerings, the Ayana (animal), 


and the Year (Soma") offerings. Two 
different Munyayanas are given in B 9 S. 
xvi. 30. 

iv. 11. ^ According to 99®- ui- 11-15 the 
characteristics of this Ayana are a cake 
for Agni and Indra and a pap for the All- 
gods But while the former is based on 
the full moon sacrifice, the latter follows 
the now moon as its model and includes 
the imitation of the DiksS, for the Soma 
sacrifice in the use of a black antelope's 
skin. Both are to last a year, 99^- 
11. 10. Cf. A9S. ii. 14. 4-6. For the 
name Weber compares PSn. v. 1. 72, and 
suggests {Ind, Stud. ii. 312) a ’possible 
relation to Tura K&vaseya. 



369] The Agrayana Sacrifice [ — iv. 14 

desiring heaven sacrifice. In that he puts on a black antelope's skin, and 
the black antelope’s skin is the holy power, verily thus he unites the 
sacrifice with holy power. There are three oblations; these worlds are 
three ; verily thus he obtains these worlds. 

iv, 12. Next ^ as to the Agrayana. He who desires proper food should 
sacrifice with the Agrayana. In the rains when the millet harvest has 
come, he gives orders to pluck millet. The new moon night which coincides 
with that time, on it should he sacrifice and then offer this sacrifice. If he 
is a full moon sacrificer, he should sacrifice with this and then offer the 
full moon sacrifice. If again he desires ® a Naksatra, he should in the first 
half of the month look out for a Naksatra and offer under the Naksatra^ 
which he desires. There are seventeen kindling verses in this sacrifice, the 
butter portions ^ contain the word ‘ being ’ ; the invitatory and offering 
verses (of the Sviatakrt offering) are Viraj verses^; the explanation of 
that has been given There is a pap for Soma ; Soma is the king of the 
plants ; thus he delights him with his own subjects. In that he gives the 
honey drink, it is because this is the sap of the forest things. 

iv. 13. When ^ spring has come and the bamboo seeds are ripe, he gives 
orders to pluck bamboo seeds. Of this (sacrifice) there is the same time, 
the same model, the same deity, the same fee, the same explanation. Some 
perform (the offering) for Agni, or Varuna, or Prajapati, but with the same 
model and the same explanation. 

iv. 14. When^ the rice harvest or the barley harvest has come, he gives 
orders to.pluck (grains) for the Agrayana ; of this (sacrifice) there is the same 
time, the same model. In that there is (a cake) on twelve potsherds for 


1 This and the next two rites .ire dealt with 

together by 99^* : the chief rites 

are beside the Soma offering of ^ydmdka 
or venuyavaSf in the case of the vnhiyava 
form a cake for Indra and Agni or Agni 
and Indra, a pap for the All-gods, and 
a cake for sky and earth, these last 
being Upah 9 uyajas ; 99®- ^2. 10. Cf. 

B9S. iii. 12 ; M 9 S. i. 64. Ap9S. vi. 31. 
18 quotes a different practice from a 
Bahvreabrahmana. 

2 upepsei is preferable to Rs. apepsetj the cor- 

ruption being easy. 

3 M inserts kalydne^ but this looks like a mere 

gloss. 

< I.e. RV. iv 13. 4 {asi) ; i. 91. 9 (sdnti). 

® I. e. RV. vii. 1. 3 and 10. 

® See KB. i. 1. There is a calf as the fee of 
the Indra and Agni offering as opposed 

47 [h.o 8. ae] 


to the honey mixture (dadhi and madhu) 
for the Soma offering. 

iv. 13. ^ To this account 99®* 

nothing, but Anartlya on iii. 12. 10 cites 
this passage. 

iv. 14. ^ This is the full form of the Agrayana 
where rice and barley are offered with 
three oblations for Indra and Agni, the 
All-gods and earth and sky, and with a 
number of simpler variants. For the 
various forms of the ritual see A 9 S. ii. 9 ; 
B 9 S. iii. 12 ; Ap9S. vi. 29, 30 ; Vait. viii. 
4 ; Hillebrandt, Rituallitteratury § 66. The 
offering is not so much, as Lindner 
{Festgrvsa an Bdhtlingkt pp. 79 seq. ) suggests, 
a thank-offering, as an offering to secure 
the fruitfulness of the new crop as this 
BrShmana shows (Oldenberg, Die Religion 
des Veda, p. 305). 



[370 


iv. 14 — ] Special Sacrijices 

Indra and Agni, and Indra and Agni are the beginning of the gods, verily 
thus at the beginning he delights the gods. In that there is a pap for 
the All-gods, and the All-gods are all the gods, verily (it serves) to delight 
all the gods. In that there is (a cake) on one potsherd for sky and earth, 
(it is because) sky and earth are the preparers of the harvest, and earth 
is a support, and by the flooding yonder (sky) co-operates.^ In that he 
sacrifices to these deities, (it is because he thinks) ‘ By these deities shall 
I eat food made calm.’ In that he gives an ox of the first birth, it is 
because this is a first ceremony. If he is wearied of this (sacrifice),^ he 
should offer the oblation of the full or the new moon, with the new 
(plants)^ to obtain both. Or again he may employ the oblations at the full 
moon or the new moon (sacrifice) to secure the presence of the deities. Or 
again he may offer in the morning and in the evening the Agnihotra with 
barley gruel of the new (plants), to obtain both. Or again having cooked 
milk in a pot on the Garhapatya he should make an offering of the new 
(plants) in the Ahavaniya to the gods of the Agrayana, with Svistakrt for 
a fourth (saying) ‘ToN.N. hail. To N.N. hail!’ to secure the presence 
of the deities. Or again having made the Agnihotra cow to eat the new 
(plants), he should offer in the morning and in the evening the Agnihotra 
with its milk, to obtain both. These are so many possibilities ; he may 
offer with whichever he may desire, but the established rule is that of 
three oblations. Three are these worlds; verily thus be obtains these 
worlds. 


ADHYAYA V 


The Four-Monthly Sacrifices 

The Vaigvadeva 


V. 1. Next^ as to the four-monthly sacrifices. He who prepares the 
four-monthly sacrifices begins on the full moon night in the Phalgunis. 


* odman&sam^ the version of the MSS., Avith a 
variant odmandsdv, read in M, in the 
comm, is difficult and obscure. The 
instr. is probably to be understood and 
reference may bo to the swelling of the 
grain, but dsdm is unexpected, ns mihi 
and yava are masculine. The gen. with 
anuveda is not unnatural if not paralleled. 
dsdm is, however, an attempt to explain 
away dsdv which has been misinter- 
preted. asau is the sky which co-operates 


or sympathizes with earth, anuveda being 
used absolutely. 

3 For the dative see Dolbriick, Altind, Synt 
p. 142. The Anand ed. has Idydt. 

* navdndm apparently goes with kwvita not 
ubhayasya ; cf. iii. 12. 14. 

’ The first two chapters deal with the Vai 9 va- 
deva, the first of the four-monthly 
sacrifices ; then the next two with the 
Varunapraghasas, the second ; then the 
next with the Sakamedhas, the last, and 



371 ] 


The Vaigvadeva 


[ — ^v.2 


The full moon night is the Phalgunis in the beginning of the year ; the latter 
two Phalgus are the beginning, the two former the end. Just as the two ends 
of what is round may unite, so these two ends of the year are connected. 
In that he sacrifices with the Vaifvadeva sacrifice on the full moon night 
in the Phalgunis, verily thus at the beginning he delights the year. A gain 
the four-monthly sacrifices are sacrifices of healing; therefore are they 
performed in the joinings of the seasons, for in the joinings of the afta.«»ApH 
pain is bom. There are eight oblations, the oblations of four full moon days 
amount to eight ; the Vai^vadeva is a compound of four full moon days. 
In that Agni is kindled, it is because the Vai 9 vadeva is propagation ; there- 
fore he generates this divine embryo. As to there being seventeen kindling 
verses, the butter portions containing the word ‘ being ’, the invitatory and 
offering verses being Viraj verses, the explanation of that has been given,® 
In that there are nine fore-offerings and nine after-offerings,® eight obla- 
tions and the offering for the steeds as the ninth, thus he obtains the 
brilliance of the Nakaatras. 

V. 2. In * that he sacrifices to Agni and Soma first of the deities, it is 
because these are the deities of the new and full moon sacrifices ; therefore 
to them first he sacrifices. In that he sacrifices to Savitr, and Savitr is 
lord of instigations, (it serves) for the creation of instigation by Savitr. 
In that he sacrifices to Sarasvati, and Sarasvati is speech, verily thus he 
delights speech. In that he sacrifices to Pusan and Pusan is he who 
yonder gives heat, verily thus he delights him. In that he sacrifices to the 
Maruts as impetuous, and the Maruts as impetuous are terrible, verily thus 
he makes healing. In that there is a milk mess for the All-gods, and the 
All-gods are all these gods, verily (it serves) to delight all the gods. 
In that there is (a cake) on one potsherd for the sky and earth, and sky 
and earth are supports, verily (it serves) for support. In that he gives 
an ox of the first birth, it is because that is a first ceremony. In that 
before or after the Qaihyuvaka, he sacrifices to the steeds uninvited, and the 
steeds are the horses of the gods, verily thus he delights these steeds. 


eight to ten willi the funaslriya rite 
which is connected with these sacrifices. 
The AB. has nothing to correspond, but 
the rites are explained in the Yajur 
texts, TS. i. 8. 2-7 ; KS. ix. 4-7 ; xv. 2 ; 
KapS. viii. 7-11 ; MS. i. 10. 1-4 ; ii. 6. 3 ; 
VS. iii. 44-61 ; ix. 86-8 ; gB. ii. 5 and 6. 
For the ritual see AgS. ii. 16-20 ; ggS. 
iii. 18-18_; BgS. v ; MgS. i. 7 and 8 ; v. 
1. 8, 4 ; ApgS. viii ; KgS. v ; Vait. viii. 
8 scy. ; Hillebrandt, Rituallitteratury § 64 ; 
Eggeling, SBE. xii. 888 seq. For Phalguni 


as the beginning of the year cf. Hopkins, 
JAOS. xxiv. 20 ; Macdonell and Keith, 
Vedic IndeXf i. 424 seq, 

* See i. 1. 

3 I, e. four more between the fourth and the 
fifth, and six between first and second, 
ggS. iii. 13. 19 seq. 

^ The offerings here are enumerated in ggS. 
iii. 13. 6-11 ; the vdjtna offering is 
described in iii. 8. 20-27 in connexion 
with the Dak^yana. 



[372 


V. 2 — ] Tlie Four-Monthly Sacrifices 

Therefore the gods with their horses become delighted. Now the steeds are 
also the seasons ; verily thus he delights the seasons. In that he sacrifices 
afterwards with the full moon oflTering, thus by him in the first half ^ of 
the month is the Vai 9 vadeva offered. 


The Varunapraghdsas 

V. 3. By ^ means of the Vaifvadeva sacrifice Prajapati created offspring ; 
they, being created, not born, ate the barley of Varuna; Varuna grasped 
them with Varuna’s nooses. The otfspring having gone ran up to their 
father Prajapati, ‘ Do thou devise that sacrificial rite by which we may 
sacrifice and be set free from the nooses of Varuna, from all ill.’ Then 
Prajapati saw this sacrificial rite, the Varunapraghasas; he grasped it, and 
sacrificed with it; having sacrificed with it he delighted Varuna; Varuna 
being delighted, freed offspring from the nooses of Varuna and from all 
evil. From the nooses of Varuna and from all evil are freed the offspring 
of him who knowing thus sacrifices with the Praghasas. In that they 
bring forward the fire, verily thus do they bring forward yonder fire which 
they kindle at the Vai 9 vadeva. In that the fire is kindled, the explanation 
of that has been given. In that there are seventeen kindling verses, the 
butter portions contain the word ‘ being ’ and the invitatory and offering 
verses are Viraj verses, the explanation of that has been given. In that 
there are nine fore-offerings and nine after-offerings, and nine oblations, 
thus he obtains the brilliance of the Naksatras; the five accompanying 
oblations ending with that to Pusan are the same ; the explanation of them 
has been given. 

V. 4. In that there is (a cake) on twelve potsherds for Indra and Agni, 
and Indra and Agni are supports, verily (it serves) for support. Indra is in 
the middle ; therefore to him in the middle he sacrifices. In that there is a 
milk mess for Varuna, (it is because) Varuna is Indra, and he has milk as 
his portion; therefore there is a milk mess for Varuna. In that there 
is a milk mess for the Maruts, (it is because) the Maruts are situated in the 
waters ; therefore with milk he sacrifices to them, for milk is the waters. 
Moreover the Maruts are Indra’s, milk is Indra’s ; therefore is there a milk 
mess for the Maruts. In that there is (a cake) on one potsherd for Ka, 

* This clearly shows that the full moon for ^ For the ofTerings here and in v. 4 see 99®* 
this part of the Brahmana was in the iii. 14. The two fires are taken forward 

middle of the month ; yet in v. 1 the full from the Ahavaniya and there is an 

moon begins the year, one of the many in- offering to Varuna at the closing bath, 

consequences of the Brahmanas. So iv. 4. 



The Sakamedhas 


373] 


[ — V. 6 


and Ka is Prajapati, verily thus he delights him ; moreover the word Ka 
is a name of happiness; verily thus he confers happiness upon himself. 
In that he gives two pairing cattle, that is the symbol of propagation. In 
that he sacrifices to the steeds, the explanation of that has been given. 
In that he sacrifices to Varuna in the waters, verily thus he delights him in 
his own home. In that afterwards he sacrifices with the full moon 
saciifice, thus in the first half of the month does he sacrifice with the 
V arunapraghasas. 


The Sakamedhas 

V. 5. The^ Sakamedhas are a sacrificial rite for Indra. Just as a great 
king placing in front the advance guard of his army, pursues his way in 
safety, verily so does he sacrifice in front to the gods. Just as there is 
that Mahavrata in the Soma sacrifice, even so is this a Mahavrata in the 
Isti sacrifice. In that he offers to Agni of the front first of the deities, and 
Agni is tlie beginning of the gods, thus at the beginning he delights the gods. 
In that at midday he sacrifices to the Maruts, the heaters, (it is because) it 
is hot at midday ; therefore at the midday he sacrifices to the Maruts, the 
heaters. Moreover, the Maruts are Indra s, the midday is Indra’s ; there- 
fore at the midday he sacrifices to the Maruts, the heaters. In tliat in the 
evening they proceed with the householder’s sacrifice and the householder’s 
sacrifice is a rite for prosperity, and prosperity is in the evening, therefore he 
offers the butter portions with the word ‘ prosperity’;^ verily thus he makes 
the sacrificer to prosper. In that in the morning they proceed with a full 
ladle, verily thus he unites the ceremony in the morning with the ceremony 
on the previous day. In that he sacrifices to the Maruts, the playful, and 
the Maruts, the playful, are Indra’s, therefore he sacrifices to them in 
conjunction with Indra. In that they bring forward the fire, that it is 
kindled, the explanation of that has been given. In that there are seventeen 
kindling verses, the butter portions contain the word ‘being’, and the 
invitatory and offering verses (of the Svistakrt) are Viraj verses, the 
explanation of that has been given.^ In that there are nine fore-offerings, 
nine after-ofierings, eight oblations and the Svistakrt as ninth, thus he 
obtains the brilliance of the Naksatras. The six accompanying oblations 
ending with ‘ that to Indra and Agni are the same, the explanation of them 

* gives the offerings thus referred * yiz, rV. i. 1. 3 {posam) and 91. 12 (pufti- 

to. Only one fire is taken forth, and vdrdhanah). The offering is to the Maruts 

there is no vajina offering or final bath as houbeholdera {grhamedhinah). 

as in the Varunapraghasas, and the fee s KB. i. 1 ; v. 1. 
is only a bull. 



[374 


V. 6 — ] The Four-Monthly Sacrijices 


has been given.^ In that he sacrifices at the end to Mahendra, (it is 
because) the leader ® occupies the end ; therefore at the end he sacrifices to 
him. In that there is (a cake) on one potsherd for Vijvakarman, and he 
yonder that gives heat is Vifvakarman, verily thus he delights him. In 
that he gives a bull, (it is) because the sacrificial rite is Indra’s. 

V. 6. In ^ that in the afternoon they proceed with the sacrifice to the 
fathers, (it is because) the fathers have the waning as their portion; 
therefore in the afternoon they proceed with the sacrifice to the fathers. 
They say ‘ Seeing that the fathers have the second half as their portion, 
then why do they sacrifice to them on the first half (of the month) ? * The 
fathers are connected with the gods ; therefore they sacrifice to them on 
the first half of the month. In that he recites one kindling verse only 
it is because the fathers are one (offering) as it were, therefore he recites 
one kindling verse only. It is an Anustubh verse ; the Anustubh is speech ; 
the fathers are turned away ; verily thus with the Anustubh as speech he 
causes them to come. In that he does not recite the Rsi descent of the 
sacrificer, (it is because he thinks) ‘ Let me not place the sacrificer in the 
fire He recites this Nigada ; the explanation of it has been given.® In 
that he invites Soma with the fathers, or the fathers with Soma, the fathers 
sitting on this strew, and the fathers made ready by Agni (it is because) 
the fathers are connected with the gods ; therefore he unites them. In that 
he invites Agni, bearer of the oblations, (it is because) the fathers are 
Svistakrt’s ; therefore he invites him. Some do not invite his greatness, 
saying ‘ This is the greatness of the sacrificer ’ ; but the rule is ‘ He should 
invite for it is the greatness of Agni. 

v. 7. In ^ that from the foi'e-ofterings and the after-offerings he leaves 
out the two for the strew, (it is because he thinks) ‘ The strew is offspring ; 
let me not cast offspring in the fire.' They are six ; the seasons are six ; 
the fathers are the seasons ; verily thus he delights the fathers. In that 
he offers the butter portions ^ with the word ' living verily thus he causes 
the sacrificer to live. In that there are three ® for each oblation, (it is because) 
there are three oblations, and he cuts ofi* from them together ; therefore 


* That is tho five of the Vai 9 vacleva (KB, v. 2) 

and the Indru and Agni offering of the 
Varunapriighasas. 

® For the ^resthin see Vedic Index, ii. 262, 403. 

* The ritual of the offering to the Pitre is 

given hy The offerings are 

not eaten hut smelt and then given to 
+he fathers. 

2 ViE. RV. X. 16. 12. 

8 See KB. iii. 2. 

* iii here is probably not merely enumerative, 


but is a quotation of the actual words of 
invitation preceded by d vaha. 

V. 7. * Tiiis chapter completes the Sakamedhas; 
the two offerings to the straw are 
omitted, reducing the fore-offerings to 
four and the after-offerings to two ; see 
99 s. iii. 16 and 17. 

2 I. e. RV. i. 79. 9 ; 91. 7. 

3 Three for each set of offering, viz, two 

Puronuvfikyas and one Yajy&, see 95®* 
iii. 16. 4-9. 



376] The Sakamedhcts [ — v, 8 

there are three for each oblation. Moreover thus he discriminates the rite 
for the fathers from the rite for the gods. Now the fathers are at a great 
distance; verily he summons them with the first, brings them with the 
second, and ofiers with the third. In that he sacrifices at the end to Agni, 
bearer of the oblation, (it is because) the fathers are Svistakrt’s ; therefore 
he sacrifices to him at the end. In that after invoking the sacrificial food 
and smelling it they do not eat it, (it is because they think) ‘The sacrificial 
food is cattle ; let us not cast the sacrificer’s cattle in the fire ’. In that 
the Adhvaryu gives to the fathers, verily thus he delights the fathers. 
In that they cleanse themselves (in the place) where the filters are, and the 
waters are healing and medicine, verily thus at the end in the sacrifice are 
healing and medicine produced. In that they mutter the Rc, verily thus 
they produce a benediction. In that having gone north they reverence 
the Garhapatya and the Ahavaniya, verily thus having given delight, they 
declare at the end their purpose to the gods. Moreover the sacrifice to the 
fathers is terminated in the south; verily thus they make it terminated 
in the north. In that having gone eastwards * they reverence the sun, and 
the sun is the world of the gods, and the fathers are the world of the 
Fathers, verily thus they ascend from the world of the fathers to the world 
of the gods. In that in the Suktavaka he does not mention the name of 
the sacrificer, (it is because he thinks) ‘ Let me not cast the sacrificer in the 
fire.’ In that they do not perform the offering to the wives with (the gods), 
(it is because they think) ‘ Let us not cast the wives in the fire.’ In that 
having gone north they perform the offerings to Tryambaka ®, verily thus 
they delight Rudra in his own quarter. Moreover, the sacrifice to the 
fathers is terminated in the south; verily thus they make it terminated 
in the north. In that at the end having sacrificed he sacrifices with an 
Isti, (it is because) the Sakamedhas terminate in that ; therefore at the end 
having sacrificed he sacrifices with an Isti. In that afterwards he sacrifices 
with the full moon offering, thus in the first half of the month ho sacrifices 
with the Sakamedhas. 

V. 8. He 1 obtains the thirteenth month in that he sacrifices with the 

< fTa%ca{h) seems almost inevitable_ as a cor- It may bo treated oitlior as a Vai9vadava 

reetion otprancam and so the Anand ed. modification or as merely a modification 

(cf. Kati. vii. 13 with Caland's note), of the full moon sacrifice, and its charac- 

and it is actually read in M, though teristics are tho offerings to ([lunasirau, 

Lindner ignores it. to Vayu and to Surya. punasirau are 

» The offerings to Tiyambaka are described apparently tho ploughshare (funa) and 

in full detail in Ap^S. viii. 18 ; B^S. v. the plough (siro) ; see Macdonell, Vedic 

Mythology, p. 166. Cf. Weber, Naxaira, 
> This chapter gives the ritual of the ^unfislrl- ii. 834. 

ya rite which is described in iii. 18. 



V. 8 — ] The Four-Monthly Sacrifices [376 

Qunasirya sacrifice; so great is the year as the thirteenth month; in 
that there is the thirteenth month, verily thus here is the whole year 
obtained. If the fire is kindled, the model is the framework of the 
Vai 9 vadeva; if it is not kindled, then the model is the full moon sacrifice ; 
the full moon sacrifice is a support ; verily (it serves) for support. In that 
the fire is kindled, the explanation of that has been given. In that there 
are seventeen kindling verses, the butter portions contain the word ‘ being 
and the invitatory and offering verses are Viraj verses, the explanation of 
that has been given. In that there are nine fore-offerings, nine after- 
offerings, eight oblations and the Rvistakrt as the ninth, thus he attains 
the brilliance of the Naksatras. The five accompanying oblations ending 
with that for Pusan are the same ; the explanation of them has been given. 
In that he sacrifices to ^unasirau, and Qunasirau are healing and medicine, 
verily thus at the end in the sacrifice are healing and medicine produced. 
In that he sacrifices to Vayu, and Vayu is breath, verily thus he delights 
breath. In that there is (a cake) on one potsherd for Surya, and he yonder 
that gives heat is Surya, verily thus he delights him. In that the sacrificial 
fee is a white (cow 2), verily thus he delights him ; verily thus is his form 
produced, 

V. 9. In ^ that they perform the expiations and the substitutions, in that 
they offer the libations, verily thus do they produce a benediction, for the 
healing of the sacrifice and the medicine of the sacrificer. 

V. 10. In that they lay to rest the sacrificer with his own fires ^ and the 
fires are a chariot of the gods, verily thus they lay him to rest on a chariot 
of the gods ; he with this chariot of the gods goes to the world of heaven, 
where is the world of those who do good.^ 

* This is an interesting case of the Sutra not with directions for the libations in iii. 

following the Brahmana, as the cow is 19. 8-8, and in 20 mucli regarding sub- 

only optional there, the ox being specified stitutes. 

first. V. 10. ' There is a reference to this topic in 

^ 2 explains that expiations AB. vii. 2. He is burnt with his sacred 

are in the case of disregard of rules, and fires. 

substitutions in the absence of the proper * The last words make a Tris^bh and the 
material. The expiatory verses are given phrase is clearly poetic. 



877] 


The Brahman PHest 


[ — vi, 3 


ADHYAYA VI 


The Brahman Priest. 


The Creative Activity of Prajdpati. 

vi. 1. Prajapati, being desirous of propagation, underwent penance ; from 
him when heated were born five, Agni, Vayu, Aditya, Candramas, and 
Usas as fifth. He said to them, ‘ Do ye also practise fervour.* They conse- 
crated themselves; then when they had consecrated themselves and had 
acquired fervour, Usas, offspring of Prajapati, taking the form of an 
Apsaras, came out in front of them ; to her their minds inclined ; they 
poured out seed ; they went to Prajapati, their father, and said, ‘ We have 
poured out seed ; let it not remain here ^ *, Prajapati made a golden bowl, 
an arrow breadth in height and similar in breadth ; in it he poured the seed ; 
then arose lie of a thousand eyes, of a thousand feet, with a thousand 
fitted (arrows), 

vi. 2. He grasped ^ his father Prajapati ; he said to him, ‘ Why dost thou 
grasp me?* He replied, ‘Give me a name, for without a name assigned 
I shall not eat food here.’ He answered, ‘Thou art Bhava.’ Since the 
waters are Bhava, thereby Bhava harms him not, nor his offspring, nor 
his cattle, nor any one claiming to be his. He who hates him becomes 
worse, not he who knows thus ; his vow is ‘ A wet garment should one 
wear.* 

vi. 3. A second time he grasped him ; he said to him, ‘ Why dost thou 
grasp me ? * He replied, ‘ Give me a second name, for with one name only 
I shall not eat food here.’ He answered, ‘Thou art Qarva.* Since the fire 
is (^arva, thereby Qarva harms him not, nor his offspring, nor his cattle 
nor any one claiming to be his. He who hates him becomes worse, not he 
who knows thus. His vow is ‘ All {mrva one should not eat 


> Chapters 1-9 give unimportant legonds of 
Prajapati. 

2 amuya bhut thus means ^ be lost but not 
directly, asiedmahd in Lindner’s od. is 
read in the Anand. ed. as asi9icdma hd. 
The form is, of course, not correct, and 
is presumably a blunder. In any event 
tho aorist is essential. M reads retova 
asiedmahai ; this suggests veto vd asiodmahi 
(with lengthening of in prolongation 
misunderstood) which is obviously better, 
and wliich Lindner has overlooked. 

48 [h.O.B . 26 ] 


vi. 2. ^ ahhydyachat is rather odd and abhydga- 
chat is an obvious correction, but hardly 
necessary ; M has the former reading, 
vi. 3. * The play of words on ^ai^va and Sarva 
is obvious, and early evidence for that 
similarity in sound which accounts for the 
constant doubt as to the real first letter 
of many words in Sanskrit lexicography 
(cf. Wackernagel, Altind. Gramm, i. 
226 seq,), 

^ nd^mydd is the obvious reading and is in M. 
ndfidydt in Lindner is a mere misprint. 



The Brahman Priest 


[378 


vl. 4 — ] 

vi. 4. A third time he grasped him ; he said to him,* Why dost thou grasp 
me ? ' He replied, * Give me a third name, for with two names only I shall 
not eat food here. He answered, * Thou art the lord of cattle.' Since Vayu 
is the lord of cattle, the lord of cattle harms him not, nor his offspring, nor 
his cattle, nor any one claiming to be his. He who hates him becomes 
worse, not he who knows thus. His vow is ‘ One should not speak ill of 
a Brahman.^ ’ 

vi. 5. A fourth time he grasped him ; he said to him, * Why dost thou 
grasp me ? ’ He replied, ‘ Give me a fourth name, for with three names 
only I shall not eat food here.' Ho answered, * Thou art the dread god.' 
Since the plants and trees are the dread god, thereby the dread god harms 
him not, nor his offspring, nor his cattle, nor any one claiming to be his* 
He who hates him becomes worse, not he who knows thus. His vow is 
^ One should not look at the cavity of a woman.* 

vi. 6. A fifth time he grasped him ; he said to him, * Why dost thou grasp 
me ? * He replied, * Give me a fifth name, for with four names only I shall 
not eat food here.' He answered, * Thou art the great god.' Since the sun 
is the great god, thereby the great god harms him not, nor his offspring, 
nor his cattle, nor any one claiming to be his. He who hates him becomes 
worse, not he who knows thus. His vow is ‘ One should not look at him 
on his rising or on his setting.' 

vi. 7. A sixth time he grasped him ; he said to him, * Why doest thou grasp 
me ? ' He replied, * Give me a sixth name, for with five names only 1 shall 
not eat food here.' He answered, ‘ Thou art Rudra.' Since the moon is 
Rudra, thereby Rudra harms him not, nor his offspring, nor his cattle, nor 
any one claiming to be his. He who hates him becomes worse, not he who 
knows thus. His vow is * What is deformed one should not cat, nor the 
narrow' 

vi. 8. A seventh time he grasped him ; he said to him, * Why dost thou 
grasp me ? ' He replied, * Give me a seventh name, for with six names only 
I shall not eat food here.' He answered, ‘ Thou art I^ana.' Since food is 
l^ana, thereby l 5 ana harms him not, nor his offspring, nor his cattle, nor 
any otic claiming to be his. He who hates him becomes worse, not he who 
knows thus. His vow is ‘ One should not repulse one who desires food only. 

vi. 9. An eighth time he grasped him ; he said to him, * Why dost thou 
grasp me ? * He replied, * Give me an eighth name, for with seven names 
only I shall not eat food here.' He answered, ‘ Thou art the thunderbolt. 
Since Indra is the thunderbolt, thereby the thunderbolt harms him not, nor 
his offspring, nor his cattle, nor any one claiming to be his. He who hates 

^ parivadei presumably has the full sense of merely * speak about*, hrdhmanam is prob, 
* speak ill of * or perhaps ‘ revile not masc. but the neut. is possible. 



379] Legends of Prajdpati [ — vi. 1 1 

him becomes worse, not he who knows thus. His vow is ‘ Let him speak 
truth only, and let him bear gold.’ This is the great god of eight names, 
distributed eightfold ; up to the eighth generation his offspring eats food ; 
ever more brilliant is a son born in the offspring of him who knows thus. 


The Function of the Brahman Priest. 

vi. 10. Prajapati practised fervour; he, having practised fervour, 
developed from his expiration this world, from his inspiration the world of 
the atmosphere, from his cross-breathing yonder world. He practised 
fervour over these three worlds ; from this world he created Agni, from the 
world of the atmosphere Vayu, from the sky Aditya. He practised fervour 
over these three lights ; from Agni he created the Rc verses, from Vayu the 
Yajus formulae, from Aditya the Samans. He practised fervour over the 
threefold lore ; he stretched out the sacrifice ; he recited with the Rc, he 
proceeded with the Yajus, he sang with the Saman. He developed the sap 
of the brilliance of this threefold lore, for the healing of these Vedas; 
he developed hhuh of the Res, hhuvah of the Yajuses, and svar of the 
Samans.^ On the south side of Ka was the Brahman, the sacrifice of Ka 
ended as broader to the south and sloping to the north ; his sacrifice ends 
as broader to the south and sloping to the north, whose is a Brahman who 
knows thus. 

vi. 11. They^ say ‘Since it is by the Rc that the Hotr becomes Hotr, 
by the Yajus that the Adhvaryu becomes Adhvaryu, by the Saman that the 
Udgatr becomes Udgatr, by what docs the Brahman become Brahman ? * 
That sap of brilliance which he developed from the threefold lore, by that 
the Brahman becomes Brahman, They say ‘ What should he know and 
what his metre whom he should choose as Brahman ? * ‘ An Adhvaryu 

some say, ‘ he knows the places for moving about.’ ‘ A Chandoga,* some 
say, ‘ so are his Haviryajiias ^ performed with the three Vedas.’ ‘ A Bahvrea ’ 
is however the rule, ‘The other two Vedas are attendants of that (the 


‘ In 95®* ^^^* 21. 1-6 it is explained that the 
Brahman priest offers the expiations at 
all Istis, the animal and the Soma sacri- 
fices and the expiations for the faults in 
the three Vedas are giyeii as above. Cf. 
A 5 S. i. 12. In AB. V. 32-34 there is 
some parallel material ; see also L 5 S. iv. 
9. 1-v. 12. 25 : K 5 S. xi. 1. 1 seq , ; xxv. 14. 
35 ; Weber, Ind. Stitd, x. 136. 

^ Kena and Kasya are presumably as less 


obvious the correct reading, as referring 
to Prajapati, not as the interrogative. 

vi. 11. ^ This chapter is important in its 
support of the Brahman and its assigning 
of him to the Bahvreas. Cf. Bloomfield, 
Atharvaveda, pp. 29 seq. For the relation 
of the Vedas cf. Max Muller, Anc, Sansk. 
Lit. p. 457; Muir, OST. ii.* 192. 

^ I. e. the Saman is thus introduced indirectly 
into the HaviryajFias. 



The Brahman Priest 


[380 


vi. 11—] 


Rgveda), and on it very many Hotr’s functions ® depend.’ With Ecs the 
cups are drawn, to Rea the Samans are sung; therefore should he be 
a Bahvrea. They say, ‘How much of the sacrifice does the Brahman 
perform? How much the other priests?’ ‘A half’ should he reply. 
There are two tracks of the sacrifice ; one is performed with speech, the 
other with the mind; that which is performed with speech the other 
priests do ; that which (is performed) with the mind, the Brahman does ; 
therefore so long as they perform with the Rc, the Yajus, the Saman, 
so long should the Brahman sit, for he performs a half of the sacrifice. 

vi. 12. When they say to him,^ ‘ O Brahman, shall we bring forward ? ’ 
‘ 0 Brahman, shall we proceed ? ’ ‘ O Brahman, shall we set forth ? ’ ‘ 0 Brah- 
man, shall we praise ? ’ he should instigate (them) with the word om only ; 
that one syllable is a counterpart for the threefold lore ; thus by him with 
the threefold lore is instigation given. In the Brahman the sacrifice finds sup- 
port. Whatever blunder or flaw there is in the sacrifice, that they report to 
the Brahman ; that he remedies with the threefold lore. If there be any 
flaw in the Rc, having taken the butter in four portions, he should offer in 
the G&rhapatya the expiatory libation, with bhuh svdlid ; thus he places 
the Rc in the ^ ; with the Rc in the Rc he makes expiation. If there be 
any flaw in the Yajus, having taken the butter in four portions, he should offer 
in the Anvaharyapacana * the expiatory libation with bhuvah svdhd in the 
case of the Haviryajna ; in the Agnidh’s fire at the Soma sacrifice ; thus he 
places the Yajus in the Yajus; with the Yajus in thoYajus hemakes expiation. 
If there be a flaw in the Saman, having taken the butter in four portions, he 
should offer in the Ahavaniya the expiatory libation with nvah svdhd ; thus 
ho places the Saman in the Saman ; with the Saman in the Saman he makes 
expiation. If there be a flaw which cannot be identified, having taken the 
butter in four portions, he should offer in the Ahavaniya only the expiatory 
libation with bhur bhuvah svar. He completes the imperfect part of the 
sacrifice who makes expiation with these exclamations. He should not 
say, when appealed to,^* * I know not this,’ when he knows these exclama- 


® Or Hotrakas. The reference is clearly to 
the multiplicating of the priestly func- 
tions falling on the Hotr and those who 
assist him ; cf. Cal and and Henry, VAgni- 
stomaj p. 8. The Anand. ed. has atra wa, 
which is nonsense. 

' These are a selection of addresses to the 
Brahman ; the two last are given in 
iv. 7. 16 in the singular ; vi. 8. 6 
respectively. The first is paralleled in 
A^S. i. 12. 12 by brahmann apah pranetyami, 
the second is dubious in reading, pra 


varisyamah being found in b as well as 
trarisydmah w, tarisydmah OL, but ccs/ts- 
ydmah is found in other non-Rgvedic 
texts (9®* xiv. 1. 3. 2 ; TA. iv. 6. 1, &c.). 
Of the other details in 13 and 14 here 
mention is made in 95®* 

6 and 7. The Anand. ed. has pra ca 
tarisydmah, 

2 I. e. the southern fire used for cooking the 
Anvaharya mess. 

* upasrtah must have this sense ; vpagruta^ of 
Ob and Max Mullor^s MS. is not possible. 



381] The Expiation of Errors in the Sacrifice [ — ^vi. 14 

tions. All indeed does he know who knows these exclamations. Just as 
there may be a string or leather fastening of wood,^ so these exclamations 
are the fasteners of the threefold lore. 

vi. 13. In ^ that he casts away a blade of grass from the seat of the Brah- 
man, verily thus he purifies it. Then he takes his place (saying) ‘ Here 
I sit down on the seat of Arvavasu ; Arvavasu is the Brahman of the gods ; 
verily thus he makes him sit down first (saying) ‘May he continue un- 
injured the sacrifice.’ Then, having taken his place, he mutters ‘ Brhaspati 
the Brahman ’ ; Brhaspati is the Brahman of the gods ; verily thus from 
him he seeks approval. When the Pranita waters are being brought for- 
ward, he keeps silence until the uttering aloud of (the word) haviskrt. 
That is the door of the sacrifice ; thus he makes it not vacant. (He keeps 
silence) after the Svistakrt sacrifice has been offered until the instigation of 
the after-offerings. That is the second door of the sacrifice ; thus he makes 
it not vacant. When the gods perfoi’ined the sacrifice they kept the Brah- 
man’s portion for Savitr ; it cleft his two hands ; to him they gave instead 
two golden ones ; therefore is he celebrated as ‘ Golden handed ’. They kept 
it for Bhaga ; it destroyed his eyes ; therefore they say ‘ Bhaga is blind 
They kept it for Pusan ^ ; it knocked out his teeth ; therefore they say 
‘ Pusan is toothless and an eater of gruel.’ The gods said, 

vi. 14. ‘ Indra is the most forcible, most mighty, of the gods ; for him keep 
it.’ They kept it for him ; he appeased it with the holy power ; there- 
fore he says ‘ Indra the Brahman.’ ^ He gazes on it (saying), ‘ With the eye 
of Mitra I gaze on thee ’ ; verily thus with the eye of Mitra he appeases 
it ; he accepts it (saying) ‘ On the instigation of the god Savitr, with the 
arms of the A9vins, with the hands of Pusan I take thee * ; verily with 
these deities he appeases it. Then separating the blades of grass he places 
(the vessel containing the Brahman’s portion) with handle pointing east on 
the bare earth (saying) ‘ On the navel of ea'rth I set thee, in the lap of 
Aditi ’ ; the earth is the appeaser of foods ; verily thus he appeases it. 
Taking thence he eats (saying) ‘ With the mouth of Agni I eat thee * ; Agiii 
is the appeaser of foods ; verily thus he appeases it. Then he sips water 
(saying) ‘ Thou art healing ’ ; the waters are healing and medicine ; verily 

* ddrvnah must of course be read as in 9A. {Mviskrd ('hi) ; the use of the term in this 

ii. 1, and in the Anand. ed. For ^esman sense is common in Ap^S. i. 16. 7 ; 19. 9. 

here BR. vii. 407 suggests * deim ^ &c. 

J See 99 s. iv. 6 and 7 (and i. 6. 9 which is 2 Cf. 9 B. i. 7. 4. 6-8 ; TS. ii. 6. 8. 3 ; GB. ii. 
incorporated in iv. 6 by reference). The 1. 2, which uses KB. ; Levi, La doctrine du 

Mantra aristam yaj9iam tanutdt is not, how- sacnjice, pp. 126, 126, 

ever, given in the Sutras, but recurs in vi. 14. » Indro brahma is clearly meant on the 
GB. ii. 1. 1. For the breaking of silence model of Brhaspatir brahma above, but the 

with havitkrt see 99 S. iv. 7. 2 ; VS. i. 16 variant is not in ritual use. 



The Brahman Priest 


(382 


vi. 14 — 

thus at the end in the sacrifice are healing and medicine produced. He 
touches his vital airs ; whatever of the breaths has been ill used or injured, 
verily thus he makes it to fill up, he heals it. At the end he touches his 
navel (saying), ‘ In the belly of Indra I place thee ’, for Indra thus appeased 
it. In that he instigates with a muttered prayer for Savitr,® and Savitr is 
the instigator, verily (it serves) to instigate the rite. 

The Characteristics of the Havit'yajnas. 

vi. 15. Prajapati is the creator of the sacrifice ^ ; by the establishment of 
the fire he created seed, gods, men, and Asuras ^ by the Agnihotra, by the new 
and full moon offerings Indra he created. For them he has created food 
and drink in the Haviryajnas and the Soma sacrifice. Moreover, whatever 
desire they had, that they obtained by these proceedings (ayana), and 
proper food by the Agrayana. They say, ‘ Why are they proceedings ? ’ 
They are goings to every desire and to the world of heaven ; by the four- 
monthly .sacrifices they obtained the worlds of heaven, all desires, all attain- 
ments, all immortality. The four-monthly sacrifices are Prajapati here, 
the twentyfour-fold year; the Vaifvadeva is, as it were, his mouth; the 
new and full moon sacrifices his joints ; the days and nights his bones and 
marrow ; the Varunapraghasas his two arms ; the three Istis his expiration, 
inspiration, and cross-breathing ; the great oblation his body ; the other 
Istis the deities within him, and the (Junasiriya sacrifice his support. The 
four-monthly rites arc Prajapati here, the twentyfour-fold year ; Prajapati 
is all ; the four-monthly sacrifices are all ; thus by all all he obtains who 
knows this. 

* The Mantra is given in 95S. iv. 7. 17. real attempt can be made to distinguisli 

’ The mixture of perfects and imperfects is the force. 

so complete that it is uncertain if any * iti hero and below is enuraeratory only. 

* ^anSsirya in KB. v. 8. 



383 ] 


The Soma Sacrijice 


[ — vii. 2 


ADYAYA VII 
The Soma Sacrifice. 

The Consecration. 

vii. 1. The ^ consecration is speech, for by speech is he consecrated. The 
consecrated is breath ; by the consecration as speech, by the consecrated as 
breath, the gods, having encompassed all desires on both sides, conferred 
them upon themselves. So verily also the sacrificer, by the consecration as 
speech, by the consecrated as breath, having encompassed all desires on 
both sides, confers them upon himself. He offers a cake on eleven pot- 
sherds to Agni and Visnu ; Agni is of the lower end of the gods, Visnu of 
the upper end ; verily through the two who are of the lower end and the 
upper end of the gods having encompassed the gods, he obtains identity of 
world with them. Therefore he who first has consecrated himself will 
attain his desire, for by him first are the gods encompassed. He consecrates 
himself with incorporeal breath consecrations ; the fore-offerings are 
expirations, the after-offerings inspirations. In that they proceed with the 
fore-offerings and the after-offerings, thus expirations and inspirations are 
consecrated ; in that (they proceed) with an oblation, thus the body (is con- 
secrated). He with the body being consecrated obtains all desires ; with 
expirations and inspirations being consecrated, identity of world and union 
with all the deities. 

vii. 2. He recites fifteen kindling verses ; the kindling verses are a thun- 
derbolt and the thunderbolt is fifteenfold. The butter portions refer to the 
slaying of Vrtra; the butter portions referring to the slaying of Vrtra are 
a thunderbolt. The invitatory and offering verses of the oblation are 
Tristubh verses ; the Tristubh is a thunderbolt ; by this thrice-formed 
thunderbolt the gods pushed away the Asuras from these worlds. Verily 
thus also the sacrificer with this thrice-formed thunderbolt pushes away the 
rivals who hate him from these worlds. The butter portions refer to the 
slaying of Vrtra ; they have been described. Next as to the invitatory and 
offering verses ^ of the oblation, the former contains (the word) ‘ to *, ‘ Let 
your tongue move up to the ghee ' ; that is the symbol of the invitatory 

1 For the consecration see AB. i. 1-6. The sacrifice with a cake for Agni and Visnu 

mystic version is an advance on the as its component offering, 

primitive conception of that rite. * See ^J^S. ii. 4. 8 for the verses. For caranyat 

vii. 2. ^ The Biksanlyesti is described in TS. i. 8. 22. 1 has caranyet ; AV. vii. 29. 1 

V. 3 : it is based on the full moon caranyat. 



[384 


vii. 2 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

verse. The latter contains the word ‘out*, ‘Let your tongue move out to- 
wards the ghee ’ ; that is the symbol of the offering verse. The invitatory 
and offering verses are Tristubh verses ; the Tristubh is might and strength ; 
verily thus he confers upon the sacrificer might and strength. ‘ The con- 
clusion of the approving formula * he says at the sacrificial food offering and 
at the Suktavaka ; when the cake for Agni and Visnu is offered then he 
says ‘ Consecrated * ; therefore he should say only ‘ The conclusion of the 
approving formula.’ ^ Just as in the case of the consecrated, he does not 
utter the name of the sacrificer in the Suktavaka; the consecrated is 
a divine embryo ; they give no name to an embryo unborn ; therefore he 
does not utter his name. 

vii. 3. He ^ does not make the wife (of the sacrificer) speak on the grass 
bundle ; he does not strew it (thinking) ‘ In that it is a Soma sacrifice, 
this sacrifice is not here complete as it were ; let me not conclude the Soma 
sacrifice before its time.’ They say ‘ Why do others not utter the name of 
the consecrated ? ’ He who is consecrating himself consecrates himself as 
Agni ; in that others do not utter his name, (it is because they think), ‘ Let 
us not sit down in Agni.’ Again, in that he does not utter the name of 
another, (it is because he thinks) ‘ Let me not, having become Agni, burn 
him.’ If he hate a man, he should mumble his name when consecrated; 
verily thus, having become Agni, he bums him. If he desire a man, he 
should utter ^ his name with a clear voice ; that is the expiation here ; the 
clear is the eye ; for with the eye he sees clearly. But this exclamation is 
the speech of the consecrated, and it is verily truth. ‘ He who speaks truth, 
he is consecrated,’ so used he to say. They say ‘ Why do they not eat the 
food of the consecrated 1 ’ In that he consecrates himself, he becomes an 
oblation ; it would be as one might eat of the undivided oblation. He may 
eat at pleasure when there is continuous pressing ; that would be as one 
might eat of the oblation when fresh.'^ They say ‘ Why does the conse- 
crated not offer the Agnihotra ? ’ The Asuras offered (it) in themselves 
without fire which was blown out ; they were defeated, when they sacri- 
ficed in what had no fire ; then the gods appropriated this breath, Agni. In 
that in the evening and in the morning the fast drink is bestowed, the 
Agnihotra is offered continuously and without a break in this breath, Agni. 


5 The usual formulae are (ypahuto) ^yam yaja- 
mdno 'sya yajnasydyura u dr cam a^lya, but 
this rule omits the reference to the 
sacrificer for the reason given. 

^ This chapter contains a discussion of some 
minor points in the Dlksa and an expla> 
nation of the omission of the Agnihotra 


on that day, which is represented by the 
fast food (milk) of tlie consecrated. 

* The Anand. ed. Inserts na. 

* So the edd. reading aydtaydmasya ; much 

more probable than the sense ‘ used ^ if 
the a is not kept. 



386 ] 


The Consecration 


[ — vii. 4 


This is the continuity of the Agnihotra in the consecrations * They pro- 
ceed (with the ceremony) on the Upasads. What is chere to discuss as to 
the day of pressing ? 

vii. 4. Next the consecration of Ke 5 in. Ke$in Darbhya, not being con- 
secrated,^ sat down. To him flew up a golden bird and said ‘ Thou hast not 
been consecrated ; I know the consecration ; let me tell it to thee ; I have - 
sacriflced once ; I am afraid of it perishing ; thou dost know the imperish- 
ableness of that which once has been oftered ; it do thou (tell) to me.* He 
said ‘ Yes’ ; they two discussed together. It was he, or Ula Varsnivrddha 
or Itant Kavya or Qikhandin Yajhasena or whoever it was, it was he. He 
said * The bodies are consecrated by that sacrifice ; but the man is consecrated 
indeed whose gods within are consecrated so he used to say. Where the 
Adhvaryu offers the uplifting offerings, then the sacrificer should offer five 
libations, the first with 'May mind for me with mind be consecrated; 
hail ! ’ : the second with ‘ May speech for me with speech be consecrated ; 
hail!’; the tliird witli 'May breath for me with breath be consecrated; 
liail ! ’ The Ijreatli (he nuiiitions) in the middle, for breath is in the middle. 
The foui'th (he offers) with ‘ May the eye for me with the eye be con- 
secrated; hail!’; the fifth with ‘May the ear for me with the ear be con- 
secrated : hail ! ’ But Kansitaki \ised to say ‘ These offerings should not 
be made ; if they were made the libations would he superabundant ; he 
should merely take hold of the Adhvaryu as he offers and pronounce 
as accompaniment the commencement (of the verses), first ‘ May mind for 
me with mind be consecrated ’ ; second, ‘ May speech for me with speech be 
consecrated ’ ; third, ‘ May l^reath for me with breath be consecrated ’ ; 
fourth, ‘ May the eye for me with the eye be consecrated ’ ; fifth, ‘ May the 
ear for me with the ear be consecrated.’ Verily also he consecrates the 
deities in man, and the libations which are superfluous arc not offered. 
Now the imperishableness of what has once been offered is faith ; he who 
sacrifices with faith, his sacrifice perishes not. Imperishableness is the 
waters, both those which are in these worlds, and those which are about the 
self. He who knowing ‘ In me there is imperishableness,’ sacrifices, his 

* There are any numluir of Dlksas if desired ; Dalbhya is read in the Anand. ed. and 

see next clause seems the comm., which has dgatija. For Ke(;in 

to denote that on the Upasad days the cf. Vedic Index^ i. 186, 187. 

practice of using r/a<(t food is also equiva- * ayaje is very odd, and tjaje 2)erhaps should 
lent to Agnihotra, and on the mtyci day be r(‘ad. The Anand. ed. has ayajet, 

the question does not arise. Levi omits the words in his translation, 

^ dih%itah in Lindner’s and the Anand. texts La doctrine du fsacrificcj p. 108 ; aho may be 

and in the comm. (Weber, Ind. Stud. ii. interrog., as Levi, but this seems im- 

308) contradicts the statement of the probable. His observation (p, 109, n. 1) 

golden bird, and presumably the obvious as to aditference of Weber’s and Lindner’s 

<;orrection ^diksitah should be adopted. texts is erroneous. 

49 [hos 05 ] 



[386 


vii. 4 — ] ' The Soma Sacrijice 

sacrifice perishes not. This imperishableness of what has once been offered 
Ke^in Darbhya proclaimed to the golden bird. In the afternoon he con- 
secrates himself ; in the afternoon he commingles all creatures ; further the 
beams go over him ® ; therefore making red as it were he goes to his setting. 
He who consecrates himself consecrates himself as him who yonder gives 
heat ; therefore on the afternoon he consecrates himself, to obtain all desires. 


The Introductory Sacrijice. 


vii. 5. The ^ gods obtained expiration by the introductory sacrifice *, 
breathing out by the concluding sacrifice ; verily thus also the sacrificer by 
the introductory .sacrifice obtains expiration and by the concluding sacrifice 
breathing out ; the introductory and concluding sacrifices are expiration 
and breathing out; therefore those who are priests for the introductory 
sacrifice should also act for the concluding sacrifice, for expiration and 
breathing out are alike. 

vii. 6. The gods having reached the world of heaven by means of the 
introductory .sacrifice could not discern the quarters. To them said Agni, 
‘Do you offer to me one libation of butter; then shall I discern one 
quarter.’ To him they offered ; he discerned the eastern quarter ; therefore 
they lead Agni forward to the east ; the sacrifice is extended eastwards, 
sitting eastwards they offer in it (the fire), for this was the quarter discerned 
by him. Then said Soma, ‘ Do you offer to me one libation of butter ; then 
shall I discern one quarter ’. To him they offered ; he discerned the southern 
quarter ; therefore they carry round in the south ' the Soma when pur- 
chased ; standing in the south he praises ; standing in the south he con- 
cludes ; sitting in the south they press it, for this was the quarter discerned 
by him. Then said Savitr, ‘ Do ye offer to me one libation of butter ; then 
.shall I discern one quarter ’. To him they offered ; he discerned the western 
quarter ; Savitr is he yonder who gives heat ; therefore him men see day 
by day going westwards, not eastwards, for this was the quarter discerned 
by him. Then said Pathya Svasti, ‘ Do ye offer to me one libation of 


’ rofanal) is clearly correct (rajatd M ; rajana 
BK and Anand. ed.), but the metaplior 
is not certain ; the idea may be that the 
rays make a red glow as the sun sinks to 
his setting. 

’ For the introductory offering (KB. vii. 
5-9), made on the first Upasad day, 
seo AB. i. 7-11. The ritual is very briefly 
given in 5?®* v. 5 ; it consists of butter 
offerings to Pathyft Svasti, Agni, Soma, 


and Savitr, a pap for Aditi ; there aro no 
butter portions. 

* A mere play onprCiyantya and udayanxya with 
praim and uddnay for which see Vedic IndeoCy 
i. 86 ; ii. 47. 

vii. 6. ^ da/ffmdis, as usual in the BrSlimana 
style, adverbial ; so in the parallel TS. 
vi. 1. 5. 1, 2 ; cf. MS. iii. 7. 1 ; ?B. iii. 2. 8. 
14-19 ; AB. i. 17. 



387] The Introdwtory Sacrifice [ — vii. 8 

butter ; then shall I discern one quarter.’ To her they offered ; she dis- 
cerned the northern quarter ; Pathya Svasti is speech ; therefore in the 
northern quarter is speech uttered with more discernment, and northwards 
go men to learn speech ; he who comes thence, to him men hearken, so he 
used to say,* for this was the quarter discerned by speech. Then said Aditi, 
‘ Do ye offer to me one libation of food ; then shall I discern one quarter.’ 
To her they offered ; she discerned the zenith ; Aditi is this (earth) ; there- 
fore on this (earth) plants grow upright, trees upright, men upright, Agni 
is kindled upright, whatever there is on this (earth) that stretches upright, 
for this was the quarter discerned by her. 

vii. 7. Thus ^ did the gods discern by means of the introductory sacrifice 
the world of heaven ; verily thus also does the sacrificer by the introductory 
rite discern the world of heaven. The introductory and concluding sacri- 
fice should be alike. The sacrifice is a chariot of the gods ; the introduc- 
tory and concluding sacrifices are the two sides * of it ; he who makes them 
alike, just as one can perform a journey as desired by driving on in 
a chariot with two sides, so safely he attains the world of heaven. He who 
makes them unlike, just as one cannot perform a journey as desired by 
driving on in a chariot with one side only, so he does not safely attain the 
world of heaven. Therefore the introductory and the concluding sacrifices 
should be alike, the introductory ending with the Qaihyuvaka, and the con- 
cluding sacrifice ending with the Qamyuvaka. 

vii. 8. He sacrifices first at the introductory sacrifice to Pathya Svasti, 
then to Agni, then to Soma, then to Savitr, then to Aditi; he advances with 
the introductory sacrifice to the world of heaven. In that he sacrifices to 
Pathya Svasti in front, verily thus he produces a benediction, for the attain- 
ment of the world of heaven. To Agni first he .sacrifices in the concluding 
sacrifice, then to Soma, then to Savitr, then to Pathya Svasti, then to Aditi ; 
he goes with the concluding sacrifice to thi.s world. In that behind he 
offers sacrifices to Pathya Svasti, verily thus he produces a benediction, for 
the attainment of this world. To those five deities he sacrifices ; with these 


* The extent of the quotation is not certain. 
For the north as a specially important 
place see Keith, TS. pp. 408, 442, n. 1. 
Weber (Inti. Stud, I. 163) and Muir (OST. 
ii.2 328, 329) cite this passage in con- 
nexion with the northern origin of the 
Aryans, and it is clearly evidence of 
speech cultivation in the north (Vedic 
IndeXf ii. 279), perhaps, as Vinayaka 
holds, Kashmir (cf. Franke's theory of the 
cultivation of Sanskrit there ; Pali und 


Sanskrit, pp. 87-9). aka cannot be taken as 
referring to taaya as taken by Muir ; the 
lack of Ui is in the context fatal. 

' This cliapter reinforces the doctrine of KB. 
vii. 5 of the identity of the two sacrifices. 

* Or ‘ side-hoims ^ (cf. Keith, JKAS. 1914, 
pp, 1084, 1086). But the use of such 
phrases as uhhayata^cakra (AB. v. 88. 4) 
renders this uncertain and indeed im- 
probable. Cf. above, ii. 9. 



[388 


vii. 8 — ] The Soma Sacrijice 

deities he obtains all that is fivefold regarding the deities and regarding 
the self. Of these the invitatory and offering verses ^ contain (the words), 
‘ safe ‘ path ‘ bring across ‘ forward and ‘ lead The Maruts, the sub- 
jects of the gods, enjoying the atmosphere, have the power to confound the 
sacrifice of the sacrificer as he goes to the world of heaven. In that they 
contain (the words),' safe’, ‘ path’, ‘ bring across’, ‘ forward’, and ‘ lead’, verily 
the Maruts, the subjects of the gods, harm him not : safely he attains the 
world of heaven. Them he inverts ; the invitatory verses in the introduc- 
tory sacrifice he makes the ofibring verses in the concluding sacrifice, the 
offering verses (he makes) the invitatory verses. 

vii. 9. He falls away as it were from this world who advances with the 
introductory sacrifice ; in that he inverts (the verses), thus he finds support 
in this world on a support which cannot be moved. Moreover the metres 
are the breaths ; verily thus in the self he intertwines tlie breaths, to prevent 
severance ; therefore these bi-eaths though blowing in diverse directions 
do not blow out.^ ‘Thee, O thou of most varied fame,’ ‘ What is best, tliat 
to Agni,’ are the Auustubh invitatory and ofibring verses (of the Svistakrt 
offering). The introductory sacrifice is the c(jntiuuance of the sacrifice, the 
concluding sacrifice is speech ; the Anustubh is speech : with speech the 
sacrifice is continued. These two he docs not invert, (thinking) ‘ The 
invitatory and ofibring verses are supports; let me not intertwine two 
supports.’ (The .sacrifice) ends with the (^aiixyuvaka ; that is the symbol of 
approach. It is as if having advanced one should dwell in the vicinity of the 
world of heaven. Again, as to (the sacrifice) emling with the Qaiiiyuvaka, 
all the deities unite in the introductory siuji’ifice ; he who would here cause 
joint offering to be made to the wives with (the gods), it would !«; as if he 
were to bring the wives of tlu^ gods to the place of their assembling ; then 
it would be as if a man there were to say of him, ‘ This (fellow) has brought 
the wives of the gods to the place of their assembly ; his wife will be 
following him to the assembly Therefore it ends with the Qaihyuvaka, to 
prevent the coming together of the deities. 


' liV. X. 03. 15 and 10 both contain bvabti or 
svasiih ; i. 189. 1 and 2 ffor Agni) havo 
natfa and piiraya ; i. 91. 1 (Soma) has ; 
X. 03. 15 lia.s pathydsu, 

vii. 9. ^ The reading of M vdnto na nindnti 
clearly is right against the text of the 
other MSS. vdneo nuninulaci^ kept in the 
Anand. ed. 

2 RV. i. 46. 6 ; v. 26. 7. 

* For the idea see Vedic hideXy ii. 427, The 
Anand. ed. has abhyavu ipjasi The acc. 


donotew the per.son spoken of ; Hopkins’ 
view (JAOS. xxviii. 404 seq.) that even 
when tlie 3rd person is used, as hero, 
the sense ‘ say to ’ can be intended is 
clearly impossible ; in BAU. i. 4. 8, cited 
by him, sa ijo 'nyam dtmanah pnyarh b7’uvd~ 
•mm brdydt priijarii rotsyatlti must mean ‘ say 
of him ‘‘ he will lose ” not ‘ say to him \ 
smhgatdm if correct must he a gen pi., a 
very remarkable form in prose ; saiiigatim 
or saihgatamj as a noun, is possible. 



389] 


TJie Purchase of the Soma 


L — ^vii. 10 


The Purchase of the Soma. 

vii. 10. The ^ Asuras in this quarter obstructed the gods. Being in the 
north-east quarter they anointed Soma in the kingship, they with Soma 
as king pushed away the Asuras from these worlds. Verily thus also the 
sacrificer with Soma the king pushes away his rivals who hate him from 
these worlds. Him he buys with four things, a cow, gold, a garment, 
a female goat ; up to four (degrees) are pairing, union, propagation ; 
(they serve) for generation.^ The moon yonder is Soma tlie king, the 
discerning; it enters into him when bought; in that he buys Soma the 
king, (it is because he thinks) ‘ The moon yonder as Soma, the king, 
the discerning, be it pressed out.’ Nine verses he recites for him when 
bought ; these vital airs are nine ; verily thus he confers vital airs on the 
sacrificer, for completeness of life in this world and for immortality in 
yonder world. ‘ I'rom good to better do thou advance forward,’ (this 
verse •^) containing the word ‘forward’ he recites for him being brought 
forward, ‘Let Brhaspati b(‘ thy harbinger ’ ; Brliaspati is the holy power; 
(thus it serves) for the winning of the glory of holiness. He recites two 
Tristubh^ verses to Varuna, ‘ This prayer of the seeker. O god,’ * Within the 
woods he hath extended the atmosphere ’ ; the Tidstubh is the lordly power ; 
Varuna is the Tristubh ; (thus it serves) for the winning of the glory of 
lordliness. He recites four Gayatri verses^ to Soma, ‘O Soma, thy 
wondrous ’ ; the Gayatri is the holy power ; Soma is the lordly power ; (thus 
it serves) for the winning of the glory of holiness and the glory of lordliness. 
He pauses after uttering the half of the last verse ; the verse is immortality; 
thus he enters immortality. Moreover the verso is the holy power ; verily 
thus he makes a defence on both sides in the holy power and the half verses. 
Wherever he stops at a half verse or a quarter verse, this is the explana- 
tion. He recites the verse/’ ‘ Thine abodes which they worship with 
oblation,’ containing (the word) ‘ forward ’, for him as he starts forward. 
He concludes with (the verse '^), ‘ He hath come, the god, with the seasons, 
let him prosper the house,’ containing the words ‘ come ’ and ‘ season ’ ; 
‘ Soma, the king, is the year,’ used to say Kausitaki, ‘ He, coming, with the 
seasons approaches.’ He repeats (verses) which are appropriate ; what in 
the sacrifice is appropriate, that is perfect ; verily (it serves) for the 

1 For the buying of the Sonia see AB. i. 12-14. * RV. viii. 42. 3 ; v. 85. 2. 

For the ritual see v. 6. 6 RV. i. 91. 9-12. 

2 The same phrase occurs above in KB. iii. 9 ; ® RV. i. 91. 19. 

below, xxix. 3. 7 53^ 7^ 

* Quoted in full in QQS. v. 6. 2. 



vii. 10 — ] 


[390 


The Soma Sacrijice 

perfection of the sacrifice. Nine® he recites; the explanation of them has 
been given; thrice (he repeats) the first, thrice the last; they make up 
thirteen ; the year has twelve months ; verily (it serves) to win the year. 
In that he recites a thirteenth, (it is because) there is a thirteenth month, 
supplementary and distinct as it were ; (thus it serves) for its obtainment.® 


ADHYAYA VIII 

The Soma Sacrifice {continued). 

The Guest Reception. 

viii, 1. By^ means of the guest reception (to Agni) the gods obtained 
both biped and quadruped animals ; verily thus also the sacrificer by means 
of the guest reception obtains both biped and quadruped animals. When the 
oblation for the guest reception is brought up, they kindle the fire ; the 
guest reception is the head of the sacrifice ; Agni is the breath ; verily 
thus he places breath in the head. He recites twelve (verses) for the 
kindling of the fire ; ^ the year has twelve months ; verily (it serves) to obtain 
the year. He recites first (a verse ®) to Savitr, ‘ To thee, O god Savitr 
to secure instigation by Savitr ; to one instigated by Savitr no possible 
injury happens ; (verily it serves) to secure freedom from injury. He 
recites to sky and earth (the verse ^), ‘ May the two great ones, sky and 
earth, for us ’ ; sky and earth are supports ; verily (it serves) for support. 
He recites for him as he is kindled the three verses^ containing (the word) 
‘ kindle ‘ Thee, O Agni from the lotus ’ ; for him when born (the verse ®) 
containing (the word) ‘ born’, ‘Let men say’ ; for him when borne in the 
hand (the verse containing (the word) ‘ hand’, ‘ Whom with the hand like 
a quoit’ ; for him when being taken forward (the verse) containing (the 
word®) ‘forward’, ‘Forward the god to the feast for the gods’; for him 

* i. e. 8 Rgveda verses and the one in note 3. ® These are the verses which follow and which 

* The KB. insists with pcculiav emphasis on are made up to sixteen. 

the 18th month ; hence vij?Uitah is prob- ^ RV. i. 24. 8. 

ably correct and not 'vijTidtah. On inter- * RV. i. 22. 13. 

calation, cf Vedic Index, li. 102, 412, 413. e RV. vi. 16. 13 -16. 

^ For the guest offering to Soma see AB. i. ® RV. i. 74. 3. 

15-17. For the ritual see<?gS. v. 7. The ’ RV. vi. 16. 40. 

verses for the kindling by friction of the ® RV. vi. 16. 41 : it and the next vi. 16. 42 are 

lire are given in iii. 13. 16-17. classed together in ggS. 



[ — viii. 2 


391] The Guest Reception 

when being summoned (the verse containing (the word) ‘hither’, ‘Hither 
bom in the All-knower ’ ; for him when being lighted, ‘ Agni is lighted by 
Agni * and ‘ For thou, O Agni, by Agni \ two (verses containing the 
word ‘ lighted ‘ They cleanse him with keen insight he says in conclu- 
sion, with (a verse ending ‘The strong steed in his own abodes’; the 
abode is the end ; the concluding verse is the end ; in the end he places 
the end. (He recites) the first thrice, the last thrice ; they make up sixteen ; 
(all this universe) has sixteen parts; verily (it serves) to obtain all this 
(universe). 

viii. 2. With this (verse he concludes) here and in the four-monthly 
sacrifices ; when an animal is ofiered, after reciting this first ^ he concludes 
with a Tristubh, ‘ By the sacrifice the gods sacrificed the sacrifice ’ , 
cattle are connected with the Tristubh; verily (it serves) to obtain 
cattle. (He recites) the first thrice, the last thrice ; they make up 
seventeen ; Prajapati is seventeenfold ; that rite is beneficial which is 
commensurate with Prajapati. He recites seventeen kindling verses; 
Prajapati is seventeenfold ; that rite is beneficial which is commensurate 
with Prajapati. The two butter portions contain references to the slaying 
of Vrtra ; verily (they serve) for the slaying of evil ; moreover ho does not 
depart from the model of the full moon sacrifice. Some ^ make them 
contain the word ‘ guest ’ ; but the rule is that they should contain 
references to the slaying of Vrtra. Some say ‘ They should have Rc 
verses as the offering verses,’ stating ‘ These deities have Rc verses avS the 
offering verses ^ in the Upasads.’ But the rule is that they should have 
offering verses with the word ‘delighting’. To him that is Soma he 
sacrifices as Visnu;^ in that being bought he enters this (universe) as it 
were, that is his form as VLsnu. In that, furtlier, he offers sacrifice to 
him that is Soma as Visnu, here what in this name is Visnu is to be eaten 
in yonder name of Soma. Therefore they offer saying ‘ Soma ’ ; so do they 
eat. The invitatory and offering verses of the oblation are Tristubh verses ; 
the Tristubh is might and strength ; verily thus he confers might and 
strength upon the sacrificer. The invitatory and ottering verses (of the 
Svistakrt offering) are Tristubh verses,® addressed to Agni, containing (the 
words) ‘ guest ’ and ‘ chariot ’, ‘ The Hotr of the sacrifice, of brilliant 


9 RV. vi. 16. 42. 

‘0 RV. i. 12. 6 ; viii. 43. 14. 

RV. viii. 84. 8. 

' pardclmj i. e. when the last verse (RV. i. 164. 
50) is added it is the pardcl, 

2 A reference to the AB. view. 

3 The Yftjya verse normally and here is a 


Mantra in prose containing the term 
jusdrui. 

^ M reads Visnur itij but it is doubtful if this 
can be accepted as it is an obvious correc- 
tion and Visnum Hi occurs again below. 

6 RV. X. 1. 6 ; iv.*4. 10. 



[392 


viii. 2 — ] The Soma Sacrijice 

chariot and ‘ Who thee, of good horses, of good gold, O Agni.’ That is 
like what is fourfold and complete.® The chariot comes to him who uses 
these two. (The sacrifice) ends with the sacrificial food ; that is the 
symbol of approach ; it is as if having advanced one should dwell in 
the vicinity of the world of heaven.' The oblations in these sacrifices, that 
of consecration, the introductory, the guest offering and the Upasads, are 
performed inaudibly ; these sacrifices are a pouring of seed ; inaudibly is 
seed poured. They proceed, ceasing (the various) rites; the consecration 
sacrifice ends with the joint sacrifice for the wives with (the gods) ; the 
introductory sacrifice ends with th'/ (j)aihyuvaka ; the guest reception with 
the sacrificial food ; in the Upasads he sacrifices to the gods. Ceasing with 
these rites Prajapati went to the world of heaven ; verily thus also the 
sacrificer ceasing with these rites proceeds to the world of heaven. 

The Pravargya. 

viii. 3. Thc^ Mahavirais the head of the sacrifice ; he should not at the 
first sacrifice place it on the fire ; the second sacrifice condescends to him 
who does not place it on the tire in the first sacrifice. Nevertheless for him 
who is a learned Brahman lie may place it in the lire. It is the self of 
the sacrifice ; verily thus with the self he completes the sacrifice. The 
Mahavira is he yonder that gives heat ; verily thus he delights him. Him 
should he praise with a hundred and one (verses) ; at a hundred leagues 
hence he gives heat ; with a hundred he attains the journey of a hundred 
leagues ; the hundred and first is the world of the saci ificer ; of this 
self the sacrificer becomes master. The man of whom men speak in the sun 
is Iiidra, is Prajapati, is the holy power ; thus herein the sacrificer attains 
identity of world and union with all the deities. Without taking in breath, 
should he praise, for the continuity of the breaths, for these breaths are 
continuous as it were. Both aloud and audibly should he praise ; the 
praise is the breaths, for it is expressed, for it has speech as its deity. 
He utters in praise verses to Savitr first, to secure instigation by Savitr ; 
to one instigated by Savitr no possible injury happens; (verily thus it 
serves) to secure freedom from injury. 

® The complete character of four appears not 18-22. For the ritual see 99 S. v. 9 and 

to be meant in the repeated phrase 10. 

acafuram, iii. 9 ; vii 10 ; but the sense 2 This is cited in Ap^S. xi. 2. 10 with the 
here is clear. Tlie number 4 as the ferta omission of syat from the Bahvrcabrfth- 

number in dicing may bo cited (see Vedic raana. Cf. KB. xii. 7. 

Index, i. 4). s For this estimate cf. Weber, Ind. Stiul, 

So above KB. vii. 9. ix. 349 aeq. 

1 For the Pravargya (KB. viii. 3-7) see AB. i. 



393 ] 


The Pravargya [ — viii. 5 

viii. 4. * The holy power bom first in the east ^ ’ (he says) ; the holy power 
bom first in the east is yonder where yonder (sun) gives heat ; verily thus 
here he places the sacrificer. He utters in praise two appropriate verses - 
containing the words ‘ anoint * and ‘ sit *, ‘ Whom extending as it were the 
sages anoint ’ and ‘ Sit down ; great art thou/ He utters in praise three 
appropriate (verses ®), containing the word ‘ burn ‘ Be thou well disposed 
to us, O Agni, at our approach/ ‘ Burn thou well, O Agni, the foes that are 
near/ and ‘ The foe who secretly may attack us, O Agni ' ; what in the 
sacrifice is appropriate, that is perfect ; verily (it serves) for the perfection 
of the sacrifice. He utters in praise (verses **) referring to the slaying of 
Raksases, * Make thou thy brilliance, like a broad net,’ for the smiting away 
of the Raksases ; Agni is the smiter away of the Raksases ; they are five ; 
by the symbol of the quarters from the quarters he smites them off. More- 
over, the number of spans the Adhvaryu measures, those he accompanies 
with these (verses). He utters in praise two appropriate (verses ^) addressed 
to Indra, ^ Around thee, O singer, the songs,’ and ‘ In the two hast thou 
placed the word of praise ’ ; verily with these two he accompanies the call of 
Hail ! to Indra. Moreover, the number of splinters the Adhvaryu gathers 
round, those he accompanies with the first, the last which he deposits with the 
last. He utters in praise two appropriate (verses to Pusan and to Rudra, 
‘ Pure is one of them, worthy of sacrifice one,’ and ^ Worthily dost thou bear 
the missiles and the bow ’ ; verily with these two he accompanies the call 
of Hail ! to Pusan and to Rudra. Moreover the two golden chips which 
the Adhvaryu makes of gold and silver, those two with these two he 
accompanies. ‘ The bird anointed by the craft of the Asura * (he says ^) ; 
the bird is breath; breath is Vayu; verily thus with these (verses) he 
accompanies the call of Hail ! to Vayu. ‘ I beheld thee perceiving with thy 
mind,’ this ® he should utter in praise in the house of him who desires 
offspring. Moreover both (should he utter) when there is something 
unaccomplished. 

viii. 5. ‘ They of the sounding drop have sounded at the rim ’ is a whole 
(hymn) and ‘The strainer for thee is outspread, O Brahmanaspati ’ are 
two verses/ ‘What time the Dhisanas spread out the strainer’ is one 

1 See 99 s. V. 9. 5. The verse occurs in AV. ® RV. iii. 18. 1 and 2 ; vi. 6. 4, used when the 
iv. 1. 1, where see Whitney’s notes, and coals are put on, 95®* 1^* 

see AB. i. 19. The verses in v. 9. 6 and 7 ^ RV. iv. 4. 1-5. 

are no doubt also meant as used in view ® RV. i. 10. 12 ; 83. 8. 

of the u.^e of savitrih in viii. 3. ® RV, vi. 68. 1 ; ii. 33. 10. 

* RV. V. 48. 7 used bile 'jyamane, 99®* ^* ^ ®^* three verses in all. 

and RV. i. 36. 9, used sadyamdne, 95®* ® ^^* three verses, ubhe refers 

V. 9. 9. to both hymns. 9^^^^* ignores this. 

viii. 5. ^ RV. ix. 73 and 83. 1 and 2. 


50 [ h -0.8 25] 



[394 


viii. 5 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

verse ; ^ they make up twelve (verses) for (Soma) the purifying ; verily with 
these he accompanies the call of Hail! for Soma. ‘May Vena impel those 
born of Pr 9 ni ' (he says) ; Vena is Indra ; verily with these verses ^ he accom- 
panies the call of Hail ! for Indra. Of this (hymn) one verse, ‘ The eagle 
flying in the vault,* he omits ; this is the radiance of the self ; this (verse) 
he inserts in the later (verses), thereby it is not removed. For one who is 
spoken ill of on both sides of the Vena (hymn) he should utter in praise (the 
verses) for (Soma) the purifying; Vena is the self; (the verses) for (Soma) 
the purifying are a purifier ; verily thus he purifies him. He utters in 
praise verses for Brahmanaspati ^ which are appropriate, ‘Thee, lord of 
hosts, we invoke*; that is the head; Brahmanaspati is the holy power; 
verily by the holy power he perfects the head. When he approaches (the 
verse ®) ‘ May we speak aloud in the assembly with good sons/ he should 
think of a son for one desiring a son ; she obtains a son. ‘ What offering 
will win your favour, 0 Afvins?* these are nine aimless verses.® The 
aimless verses are as it were of the Gayatrl metre; breath is connected 
with the Gayatri; the aimless verses are breath. (He utters) three 
Anustubh verses,*^ ‘ Hither with all aids * ; that is speech. ‘ Let Visnu form 
the womb/ that (hymn ®) should he utter in praise in the house of him who 
desires offspring. Moreover both (should he utter) when there is something 
unaccomplished. 

viii. 6. ‘ Make sacrifice to the two who move in the morning first,* (he 
utters) in the forenoon this hymn;^ ‘ Agni shineth, the forefront of the dawns* 
in the afternoon.® They are Tristubh (hymns), of five verses ; that is the eye. 
‘ I praise sky and earth for first inspiration * is in Jagati,^ of twenty -five 
verses ; that is the ear. That is the head ; that head is complete in which 
there is breath, speech, the eye and the ear. Thus them in it he places. 
When it is said, ‘ Glowing is the pot/ he utters in praise this appropriate 
(verse ^), containing (the word) ‘glow*, ‘The tawny one, the chief, hath 
made the dawns to glow.* He concludes with (a verse ®) containing (the 
word) ‘ around *, ‘ With days and with nights guard us around.* He utters 
in praise appropriate (verses) ; what in the sacrifice is appropriate, that is 
perfect ; verily (it serves) for the perfection of the sacrifice. They make up 


2 Given in full in 99^. v. 9. 16. 

3 RV. X. 128, omitting verse 6. 

< RV. ii. 23, the whole hymn. 

6 RV. ii. 23. 19 d, 

* RV. i. 120. 1-9. akUdhryarlc (also in KB. 
xviii. 4) is of quite uncertain sense, but 
cf. mdkudryak in RV. x. 22. 12, and akutrd 
in RV. i. 120. 7 ; Oldenberg, Rgvtda-Noten^ 
i. 117. 


7 RV. vii. 24. 4-6. 

^ RV. X. 184, the whole hymn. Not noticed 
in 99 s. 

’ RV. V. 77. 

RV. V. 76. 

5 RV. i. 112. 

♦ RV. ix. 83. 8. 

6 RV. i. 112. 26. 



395 ] 


Ttis Pravargya [ — viii. 7 

a hundred and one verses ; the explanation of these has been given. In 
that he touches the waters, and the waters are healing and medicine, verily 
thus at the end in the sacrifice are healing and medicine produced. In that 
he pays reverence with the ‘opening’ verses,^’ and the openings are the 
breaths, verily thus he places the breaths in himself. In that he touches 
the waters, and the waters are healing and medicine, verily thus at the end 
in the sacrifice are healing and medicine produced. The latter set are 
thirty-three ; ^ all the deities are thirty-three ; they should support that ; 
from them is all that taken out. 

viii. 7. He utters in praise appropriate (verses) for the milking ; ^ what 
in the sacrifice is appropriate, that is perfect ; verily (it serves) for the per- 
fection of the sacrifice. He utters in praise the two appropriate (verses ^), 
containing (the word) ‘pour’, ‘In the pressed pour the admixture’ and 
‘Now hath the Rsi for the Afvins.’ He utters in praise the appropriate 
(verse ^), ‘ Up the god Savitr with the golden,’ containing the word ‘ lift up ’ 
as (the pot) is being lifted up. He utters in praise an appropriate (verse ^) 
addressed to Brahmanaspati, containing (the word) ‘ forward ’ as they moV^e 
forward, ‘Let Brahmanaspati move forward.’ As they go ho utters in 
praise (the verse ^) appropriate in containing (the word) ‘ flying ‘ The eagle 
flying in the vault.’ With two (verses ®) should he utter the offering prayer ; 
strength is a pair ; (verily it serves) to win strength ; with a Tristubh in 
the verses on the forenoon, for it, being connected with the Tristubh, keeps 
supporting the three worlds ; with a Jagati in the verses in the afternoon, 
for it is connected with the Jagati, for as it goes to rest all the world (jugat) 
goes to rest with it. ‘ Inverting the two verses from the Samhita should 
he utter the call of vamt' some say, but the rule is to follow the traditional 
text. He utters in praise subsequent (verses) which are appropriate ; what 
in the sacrifice is appropriate, that is perfect ; verily (they serve) for the 
perfection of the sacrifice. ‘ O thou rich in oblation, oblation, the mighty 
seat of the gods ’ (he says ^) before the accomplishment of the libation ; verily 
thus he makes it with renewed oblation and unexhausted. He concludes 
with (a verse ^) containing a benediction, ‘ From eating the good pasture 
mayest thou be of good fortune ’ ; verily thus he pronounces a benediction 
for cattle ; so are cattle not liable to stray from the sacrificer. In that he 

® Of tlie Adhvaryu, 9?®. v. 9. 81. ® The two verses used together (samasta) at 

’ i. e. thn verses for the milking referred to the morning Pravargya are RV. i. 46. 16 

in KB. viii. 7, (Gayatri) and a special verse in 99 ®* v. 11. 

' For these 83 verses see 99®* v. 11. 1 seq, is (Tristubh), in the afternoon, RV. viii. 

2 RV. viii. 72. 13; 9. 7. 5. 14, and a verse in 95 ®* ^* f^* 

3 RV. vi. 71. 1. (Jagati). 

< RV. i. 40. 3. ’f RV. ix. 83. 6. 

» KV. X. 123. 6. 8 RY. i. 164. 40. 



[398 


viii.7 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

touches the waters, and the waters are healing and medicine, verily thus at 
the end in the sacrifice are healing and medicine produced. Now they say 
* After the pressing ® should it be put on the fire ' ; when the Bahispavamana 
(Stotra) has been sung, they invoke the two Alvins, the gods; at that 
moment should they put it on the Agnidh’s fire ; just as there in the Upasads, 
so here on the pressing day the procedure is without taking breath. Then 
after due performance (the pot) is put on, and the animal sacrifice is 
undertaken ; the Mahavira terminates at midday ; in that with it they 
proceed at midday, and the Mahavira is he yonder that gives heat, verily 
thus they delight him ; verily thuf3 his symbol is produced. 


The Upasads. 


viii. 8. The Asuras made citadels ^ in these worlds, iron in this, silver in 
the world of the atmosphere golden yonder in the sky they made ; the gods 
when these worlds were invested * saw the fifteenfold thunderbolt ; three 
kindling verses repeated together make up nine, the invitatory and offering 
verses six ; they make up fifteen. By means of this tifteenfold thunderbolt 
the gods pushed away the Asuras from these worlds ; verily thus also the 
sacrificer with this fifteenfold thunderbolt pushes away the rivals who hate 
him from these worlds. In the forenoon he should repeat the three verses,^ 
‘ To the bounteous one, to him to be attended ’ ; for these are the Upasads. 
That rite is successful over which the first (three verses) are said, (for, they 
say), * This day is as it were to be attended on by yonder sun.* ^ This 
kindling-stick of mine, O Agni * (he says ^) in the afternoon ; that is the 
symbol of night, (for they say) ‘ In the evening they sit round this fire 
kindled as it were.’ Then on the second day (he says) in the forenoon 
‘ This kindling-stick of mine, O Agni ’ ; that is the symbol of day, (for they 
say) ‘ This day is kindled as it were by yonder sun.* (He says) in the 
afternoon ‘ To the bounteous one, to him to be attended ’ ; that is the 
symbol of night, (for they say) ‘ They sit round in the evening this fire 
which is to be attended as it were.* Both these symbols are recognized ; 


® This is a variant mode of the Pravargya 
where the two performances take place 
on the sutyd day, one after the morning 
Stotra and one after the midday Stotra. 

The Anand. ed. has mndhyamdino (we) sargas, 
^ For the Upasads see AB. i, 23-6. For the 
ritual see 99^. v. 11. The Upasads hero 
must be fortifications of the Asuras against 
the worlds to hold them from the gods. 
Upasadah at tlie beginning is probably the 


title of the section, and is clearly so 
taken in M, which punctuates after it ; 
so below, KB. xxiv. 1; xxvii. 4, 

* parigrtetu is clearly preferable to either 

°strtetuWf or °svrtem O w/x, or patipruteM 
Anand. ed. 

* RV. vii. 16. 1-3 : these (like the next) are 

the S&midheni verses. 

* RV. ii. 6. 1-3. 



397] The Upasads [ — 9 

therefore day by day in alternation should he repeat (hoping) ‘ Let both 
symbols, both desires be attained/ He should repeat without taking 
breath, for the continuity of the breaths; for continuous as it were are 
these breaths. Thrice each one should he repeat ; these worlds are three ; 
verily thus he obtains these worlds. They repeated together make up 
nine ; the seasons are six ; these worlds are three ; verily thus they make 
up that. He should not say this Nigada® in the kindling verses; the 
Nigadas are omitted; it would be repetition if one were to say this 
Nigada. ‘He should not invite at all,’ some say; ‘But how without 
inviting can he say the offering verse for a deity?’ (For this reason). After 
the Rc he should invite with (the invitatory verses), ‘ Bring Agni, bring 
Soma, bring Visnu.’ For these three gods he says the offering verses; 
these worlds are three ; verily thus he makes these vrorlds full of light. 

viii. 9. The two verses^ for Agni are Gayatri verses ; this world is con- 
nected with the Gayatri ; thus he obtains this world. Those for Soma are 
Tristubh verses; the world of the atmosphere is connected with the Tristubh; 
thus he obtains the world of the atmosphere. Those forVisnu are Jagati 
verses; yonder world is connected with the Jagati; thus he obtains yonder 
world. These he inverts ; those which in the forenoon were invitatory verses 
he makes offering verses in the afternoon ; those which were offering verses 
he makes invitatory verses, to avoid exhaustion, (thinking) ‘ The Rc 
becomes exhausted through the vasat call ; let me perform the vasat call 
with (verses) unexhausted on the same day In that he inverts also, (it is) 
for the strength of the neck ; therefore the joints of the neck are as it were 
intertwined. The gods have butter as their oblation, the sacrificer has 
milk as his fast food ; that is in accord. He should treat them as broader 
above; on the first day (he should milk) three teats, then two, then one;^ 
verily thus he makes the worlds mutually broader. He should not take out ; 
they advance to the world of heaven who undertake the Upasads ; the 
world of heaven is twelve journeys away ; he who takes out once, it is 
with him as if one should follow after those with one object sent on a single 

» The point of tliis, if rca = rcah, is that he is ed. is really impossible, caneti should be 

notto use the usual formula (Nigada) Agne read with WM. 

mahan asi (99®. i. 4. 44) and the terms ' For the verses see 95®. v. 11. 7 : they are 
d vaha devdn yajamandyay but merely after RV. vi. 16. 34 and 39 for Agni ; i. 91. 2 and 

the last Pranava of the preceding Rc to 21 for Soma ; i. 166. 2 and 3 for Visnu. 

use the three invitatory formulae given ; They follow the invitatory formulae, 

if rca = fee then the translation is less ^ The offering verses end with vausatj but not 
easy ; it seems most probable that ktm u the invitatory verses, 

begins a new clause, answering the ^ The discussion evidently touches on the 
previous, though it might=s ‘but rather \ usual question of possible mitigations of 

caned read by Lindner and the Anand. the unpleasantness of fasting. 



[398 


viii. 9 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

night before. If he takes out twice, it is as if the time were two nights ; 
through a third (taking) he loses the world of heaven, he cannot attain it. 
‘ He may however follow/ used to say Paihgya. ‘ But he should not take 
out ; wherever he wishes, there first should he go in the world of heaven and 
stop : such a completion is better,’ used Kausitaki to say. In the case of 
(need of) eating, his compeers^ may bring curds for him, but not in the 
time of the fast food ; curds is Soma ; his food becomes unobstructed ; he 
obtains it. If they purchase (the Soma) together, the others should proceed 
for two days with the middle Upasad, for it is an insertion, being in 
position the world of the atmosphere : so without conflict ^ he proceeds. 


ADHYAYA IX 

The Soma SAcnrFicE {continued). 

The Bringing forivard of the Fire. 

ix, 1. Agni^ is the holy power ; in that on the fast day they bring forward 
the fire, with the holy power do they strike away the evil of the sacrificer, 
ill front with the Ahavaniya, behind with the Garhapatya, on the north 
with the Agnidhriya, on the south with the Marjaliya, in the middle with 
those within the Sadas. Therefore on the fast day they lead forward the 
fire to the east, they take out the fires of the priests ; verily (they serve) to 
smite away the evil of the sacrificer. The gods being about to consecrate 
themselves had recourse to speech, ‘ Thou hast much and varied experience ; 
but we wish to be compact of truth, compact of restraint.’ She desired a por- 
tion in the consecration, but the gods would not give her a share therein. She 
(desired a share) in the introductory sacrifice, and they would not (give) 
her (a share) therein; in the sale, and they would not (give) her (a share) 
therein ; in the guest reception, and they would not (give) her (a share) 
therein. She did not at all approach the Upasads being as it were vexed ; 
therefore there should they proceed inaudibly so that they can just hear 
one another. She came when the fire was being brought forward on the 
fast day ; the gods gave her a share therein ; therefore there first should 
he recite aloud, so that they may know that she has arrived and has been 
given a share in the sacrifice. 

* krtavdjapeydhf comm. ; otherwise samrdj is but tlio concurrence of the MSS. includ- 

Soma, the king. ingM establishes this text. Of. KB.vii. 9. 

® It may be ‘it * proceeds : there ia no cer- ^ For tho Agnipranayana see AB. i. 27 and 
tainty : asamdram would be more simple, 28. For the ritual see 95S. v. 12. 5 ; iii. 

14. 8-14. 



399] The Bringing forward of the Fire [ — ix. 3 

ix. 2, He recites for him as he is taken forth the three verses ^ containing 
‘ forth ‘ Forth the god with the thought divine.’ ‘ Thee in the footstep 
of the sacrificial food he says® ; the sacrificial food is this (earth), for in it 
he praises {UU) all. He praises him when deposited with the half verse ® 
containing (the word) ‘deposit’, ‘O All-knower, we deposit thee.’ He 
praises him when he has sat down with (the verses *) containing (the word) 
‘ sit ‘ O Agni, of fair face, with all the gods ’ ; ‘ Sit, O Hotr, in thine own 
place, discerning ’, and ‘ The Hotr in the Hotr’s seat, well knowing.’ He 
concludes with (a verse ®) containing the word ‘ herald ’, ‘ Thou art a herald ; 
thou also our protector from afar.’ He recites appropriate verses ; what 
in the sacrifice is appropriate, that is perfect; verily (it serves) for the 
perfection of the sacrifice. Eight he recites; the Gayatri has eight syllables ; 
Agni is connected with the Gayatn, and has the Gayatri as his metre ; 
verily thus with his own metre they bring Agni forward. (He recites) the 
first thrice, the third thrice ; they make up twelve ; the year has twelve 
months ; verily (they serve) to obtain the year. They repeated together 
make up eighteen Gayatri venses ; verily by the metre it is connected with 
Agni. Of whatever even metre there are six ® they make up a Gayatri ; 
of whatever there are seven, an Usnih, of whatever there are eight an 
Anustubh, of whatever there are nine a Brhati, of whatever there are ten 
a Pankti, of whatever there arc eleven a Tristubh, of whatever there are 
twelve (syllables) a Jagati. 


The Moving forward of the Soma Carts. 

ix. 3. The ’ two oblation holders are speech and mind ; in speech and in 
mind is all this (universe) placed. In that they move forward the two 
oblation holders, verily (it serves) to obtain all desires. The oblation 
holders are two, the cover as the third they deposit ; with them he obtains 
all that which is threefold regarding the gods or the self. He recites for 
them as they are moved forward (a verse ®) containing (the word) ‘ forward ’, 
‘ Let the two come forward with weal for the sacrifice ’, ‘May sky and earth 
for us this ’, and ‘ Rich in ghee is their milk ’ he says ® ; the first (verse) 
contains a benediction ; the second mentions two deities : the libation which 

* RV. X. 176. 2-4. » Four Padas are absurdly assumed, it would 

* RV. iii. 29. 4, when the kindling wood is appear. 

being placed on, 95®* 3. * For the moving forward ofj the two 

* RV. iii. 29. 4 c. carts which held the oblations see AB. 

^ RV. vi. 16. 16 ; iii. 29. 8 ; ii. 9. 1. i. 29. For the ritual see 95®* ''^* 

® RV. ii. 9. 2. * RV. ii. 41. 19 (also cited in KB. xxvi. 10). 

’ RV. j. 22. 14. 



[400 


ix. 3 — ] 


The Soma Sacrifice 


the Adhvaryu offers in the track of the two oblation holders he accompanies 
with the first (verse) ; in that they move forward the two oblation holders, 
that he accompanies with the latter. He praises the two oblation holders 
with the appropriate (verse ^), ‘What time ye came like twins striving/ 
‘ Let men in service to the gods ’ (he says % for many drag the two. ‘ In the 
two hast thou placed the word of praise ' and ‘ All forms the sage doth 
assume (he says ) ® ; in that they put on the cover third, that he accom- 
panies with the first, in that they enclose the two oblation holders, that 
with the latter. 

ix. 4. Moreover (he accompanies) with the latter the offering on the front L 
When he thinks of the two, ‘ They will not move them there \ when they 
make them standing in the middle, then (should he say^) ‘To your lap, 
O ye that deceive not ’ ; when there is rest, then a lap ^ is made. He 
concludes with (a verse ^) containing (the word) ‘ around ‘ Around thee, 
O singer, the songs.’ He recites appropriate (verses) ; what in the sacrifice 
is appropriate, that is perfect ; verily (they serve) for the perfection of the 
sacrifice. They make up eight ; with them the gods attained all attainments ; 
verily thus also with these the sacrificer attains all attainments. (He recites) 
the first thrice, the last thrice ; they make up twelve ; the year has twelve 
months ; verily (they serve) to obtain the year. Further, in that (he recites) 
the first thrice and the last thrice, verily thus he ties the two ends of the 
sacrifice, for firmness and to avoid slipping. Then they say to the Hotr 
‘Do thou, O Hotr, act so that there may be freedom from fear.’ Thus 
exhorted, before pronouncing the Rc, he pushes a clod westwards with the 
fore part of his right foot (saying^), 

‘From hence the fear from men and from others than men, O Vrtra 
slayer. 

Away the wheels have rolled ’ ; 

Hence is there risk from the wheels; thus for this region there is 
freedom from fear. He® should resort to the left track of the right 


^ RV. X. 13. 2. 

6 RV. X. 13. 26. 

® RV. i. 83. 3 (above KB. viii. 4) ; v. 81. 2. 

^ This offering of the Adhvaryu is described 
in Caland and Henry, VAgnistoma, p. 89. 

* RV. ii. 41. 21. The meaning of nahhyastha 

is not quite clear ; cf. Caland and Henry, 
p. 86. 

^ upasthah alludes, no doubt, to the fact that 
in sitting (Jcsema in the case of a man) 
then an upastha can be formed by crossing 
the limbs ; see Hillebrandt, Neu- und 
Vollmondsop/erf p. 92 • 

♦ RV. i. 10. 12 (cited also in KB. viii. 4). 


* The translation of this verse is conjectural 
but makes sense ; it occurs in variant 
versions in MS. i. 2. 9 ; TB. iii. 7. 7. 14. 
The Anand. ed. has jaj9lam and anya~ 
jajTiam, 

® prdcyam is possible, but odd. M. has appa> 
rently prd^?/aw (prdn ?yan?), aydni in M. 
agrees, and suggests this use of yan ; 
Lindncr^s pratidadhydt is nonsense, and 
M and the Ananda 9 rama ed. have the 
certain paridadhydt Cf. Caland, VOJ. 
xxiii. 62, who compares 95®* '’^* ^ 

anusamyarij but does not suggest yan here. 



401] The Bringing forward of Agni and Soma [ — ix,6 

oblation holder, which is facing east, (thinking) ‘The right oblation 
holder is this world; this world is a support; let me be unmoved in 
going on this support/ He should not move to right or left from the 
place where he stands as he says the final verse. If he should move 
from it to right or left, and if some one were to say of him, ‘ He shall fall 
away ’, so would it be. After concluding, having wheeled round on his right 
arm, keeping silence, have gone as he came, having stood where standing 
he has uttered the first (verse), both in the rite and in the taking forth of 
the fires,*^ he should go to his place. 

The Bringing forward of Agni and Soma. 

ix, 5. Agni ' is the holy power ; Soma the lordly power ; in that on the 
fast day they lead forward Agni and Soma, verily thus by the holy power 
and by the lordly power, they smite away the evil of the sacrificer. They 
say ‘Sitting the Hotr should recite this first (verse); all beings move 
forward with the leading forward of Soma, the king ; in that sitting the 
Hotr recites this Rc, verily thus he restrains all beings in their due place/ 
‘ Do thou pour forth, O god, for the first the father ’, this verse ® for Savitr 
he first recites, to secure^ instigation by Savitr ; to one instigated by Savitr 
no possible injury happens ; (verily it serves) to secure freedom from injury, 
(With the verse ^), ‘Rise up, O Brahmanaspati ^ he causes (the fire) to be 
removed ; (with the verse ®), ‘ Let Brahmanaspati move forward * he leads 
(it) forward. He recites two appropriate (verses) for Brahmanaspati; 
Brahmanaspati is the holy power ; verily thus by the holy power he makes 
the sacrifice successful. ‘ The Hotr, the god, the immortal ’ and ‘ To thee, 
O Agni, day and day these sets of three verses ® for Agni alone he recites, 
for Agni they take first. These contain (the word) ‘go’, for he praises 
Agni as he is taken. When he comes to (the words '^), ‘ The embryo of 
beings I take up ’, then he should think of an embryo for one who desires 
an embryo ; she obtains an embryo. In the Agnidh’s altar they put down 
the fire. When the Adhvaryu ofiers the libation, then should he repeat 
this (verse ^), ‘ O Agni, rejoice ; be glad in this prayer/ This is the offering 
verse for this (libation), being appropriate as containing the words ‘rejoice’ 
and ‘ be glad ’. 

^ The Anand. ed. has, absurdly, <ignih praha- ^ Given in full in 9?^* 

raw, * RV. i. 40. 1. According to 99^* ^ 

^ For the leading forward of Agni and Soma is said uttiathatm. Oited also in KB. xz. 8. 

see AB. i. 80. For the ritual see 99 S. v. » rv. i. 40. 8. ** 

14. ® RV. iii. 27. 7-9 and i. 1. 7-9. 

< tad eva and yathdyatanam in M are decidedly ^ RV. iii. 27. 9. 
superior to the readings tad and yatha- « RV. i. 144. 7. 
yatham of the other MSS. 

51 [h.o.s. as] 



ix. 6 — ] The Soma Sacrifice [402 

ix. 6, Then they lead Soma alone eastwards; therefore he recites verses^ 
for Soma alone, ‘ Soma goeth, who knoweth the way/ Reciting the three 
verses, which contain a reference to ^ going he follows on. There the 
Adhvaryu offers again a libation in the Ahavanlya ; then he should recite 
this (verse ^), ‘ To the dear one, the strengthener.* This is the offering verse 
for this (libation), being appropriate as containing (the word) ‘increasing the 
libation \ Then they cause the king to enter by the eastern door ; as he is 
made to enter, he recites for him made to enter (the verse ®), ‘ This of him 
King Varuna, this the A 5 vins,* which is appropriate in having (the words), 
‘This stall doth Visnu, with his companions, reveal* For him when he has 
arrived he recites (the verse ^) ‘Within hast thou come forward; thou shalt 
be Aditi *, which contains (the word) ‘ forward He praises him when 
seated with the verses ® containing (the word) ‘ sit *, ‘ Like an eagle his nest, 
the seat wrought with devotion ’, ‘ Thee, lord of hosts, we invoke *, and ‘ He 
hath established the sky, the Asura, all-knower/ He concludes with 
(averse®) containing a benediction, ‘ Do thou welcome Varuna the great.* 
He recites appropriate verses ; what in the sacrifice is appropriate, that is 
perfect ; verily (they serve) for the perfection of the sacrifice. He recites 
twenty verses ; they make up the Viraj ; Soma is connected with the Viraj ; 
the Viraj is food ; Soma is food ; thus by food he causes proper food to 
abound. (He recites) the first thrice and the last thrice ; they make up 
twenty-four; the half months of the year are twenty-four; verily (they 
serve) to obtain the year. If they cause the king to enter by the eastern 
door thus is it ; but if they (cause him to enter) by the western (door) the 
Hotr should follow after ^ (thinking) ‘ The Hotr is the body of the sacrificer ; 
Soma is the breath; let me not sever the body from the breath.* He 
concludes standing facing south to the north (of the oblation holder); 
Soma the king is glory ; proper food from thence onwards he confers and 
glory upon himself. 


» RV. iii. 62. 13-16. 
2 RV. iz. 67. 29. 

8 RV. i. 166. 4. 

^ RV. viii. 48. 2. 


® RV. iz. 71. 6 ; ii. 23. 1 (cited above KB. 

viii. 6) ; viii. 62. 1. 

« RV. viii. 62. 2. 

’ anusamlyat is paralleled by lyuhj KB. xxx. 6 j 
it is read in M. 



403] 


The Animal Sacrifice 


l-x. 1 


ADHYAYA X 


The Animal Sacrifice. 


X. 1. The ' sacrificial post is a thunderbolt. In that they erect the post 
on the fast day, verily thus with a thunderbolt they smite away the evil 
of the sacrificer. It should not be bent, as it were, for to be bent in the 
stomach is the symbol of one hungry. Again it should be turned towards 
the Ahavaniya ; that is the symbol of one well fed ; his wives * are not 
like to be hungry, who makes a post so formed. One of Palana wood 
he should make who desires splendour, of Bilva wood he who desires proper 
food, and of Khadira he who desires heaven. It should be three cubits 
with the symbol of these worlds, four cubits with the symbol of cattle, 
five cubits with the symbol of the Pankti, six cubits with the symbol of the 
seasons, seven cubits with the symbol of the metres, eight cubits with the 
symbol of the Gayatri, nine cubits with the symbol of the Brhati, ten cubits 
with the symbol of the Viraj, eleven cubits with the symbol of the Tristubh, 
twelve cubits with the symbol of the Jagati. These measures are suitable 
forms for the post. One suitable form should he produce and make the 
post. They say however, ‘ One should not measure the post ; let it be 
unmeasured; the measured by the measured one wins; the unmeasured 
by the unmeasured; (therefore it serves) to win the incommensurable.’ 
‘ Both for the post and the altar (he should choose *) the size which he 
considers in his mind suitable (Kausitaki) used to say. Mind is Prajapati ; 
Prajapati is the sacrifice ; the sacrifice itself rejoices in the sacrifice when 
mind in mind. The post in the Vajapeya alone is determined as of seven- 
teen cubits. It is placed in with eight comers, for the attainment of all 
desires. Then they wash it ; thus what of it has here been harshly treated 
as it were with the axe and hewn as it were, that of it verily he makes 
whole, that he heals. Then they® anoint it; thus the waters which are 
in man, these they place in it ; well anointed himself should the sacrificer 
make it ; so does the sacrificer become not rough as it were. 


1 For the animal ofifering of the Soma sacrifice 
see AB. ii. 1-14. For the ritual see 99®* 
V. 15-20, The Adhy&ya is trans. by R. 
Lobbecke, who gives the commentary in 
full ( t^her das VerhMinis von Brahmaiias und 
frautasutroA ; Leipzig dissertation, 1908), 
on which see W. Oaland, VOJ. xxiii. 68. 

* hhdryd bhavanti is to be read with W wb M /i K, 
not bhavati. 


3 The quotation is not marked but no doubt 
ends at avaruddhyai. Cf. KB. x. 8, n. 2, 

* M. adds tat kurvltay a mere gloss but a correct 
one. The opinion is, of course, Kausi- 
taki’s. 

B anjati as a singular is an anomaly which can 
be excused only by the proximity of 
anjanii in x. 2. But I think a9ijanti 
should be restored and so read ; as in the 
case of prat^ijati a plural is natural. 



X. 2 — ] The Soma Sacrijice [404 

X. 2. For it when being anointed he recites the appropriate (verse') 
containing the word ‘anoint*, ‘They anoint thee at the sacrifice, pious 
men*. For it when being placed erect he recites (verses®) containing the 
words ‘ erect * and ‘ up *, ‘ Rise erect, O lord of the forest *, ‘ Rising before 
the kindled’, ‘Bom he is born in the fairness of the days*, ‘Aloft to 
our aid*, and ‘Aloft do thou guard us from tribulation with thy ray*. 
He concludes with (a verse containing the word ‘ covered round *, ‘ The 
youth, well clad, covered round, hath come.* He recites appropriate verses ; 
what in the sacrifice is appropriate, that is perfect ; verily (it serves) for the 
perfection of the sacrifice. He recites seven (verses) ; the metres are seven ; 
verily (they serve) to obtain all the metres. (He recites) the first thrice and 
the last thrice ; they make up eleven ; the Tristubh has eleven syllables ; 
cattle are connected with the Tristubh ; verily (they serve) to obtain cattle. 
So is (the ceremony) in the case of one victim and one post. If at one post 
they should deal with eleven victims, then in the case of each victim the 
Adhvaryu gives directions, in the case of each victim there is the same 
concluding (verse), * The youth, well clad, covered round, hath come ’ ; it is 
(recited) for it as it is being covered round. ‘ So in the case of one post, 
but how in the case of eleven posts?* (they ask). The same seven verses 
he should recite for them up to ten ; in the case of the last post they set up 
he should apply the remainder of the hymn, before the Pragatha \ ‘ Then 
like horns of the homed they appeared.* Verily all he accompanies ; there 
is the same concluding verse, ‘ The youth, well clad, covered round, hath 
come ’ ; it is (recited) for it as it is being covered round. ‘ It *, they say, ‘ he 
should throw along ; the post is the sacrificer ; the Ahavaniya is the world 
of heaven ; verily thus he makes him go to the world of heaven ; that is 
heavenly*. But they say ‘Let it stand; in that this is the place of the 
splinter of the post, the Asuras and the Raksases could drink after if this 
were not so ® ; therefore this (post) should stand erect as a thunderbolt on 
the place of sacrifice, smiting away the Asuras and the Raksases, and 
repressing them, and also guarding the sacrifice and the sacrificer.* One 
is suited for the post, one is rich in wood, one is fitted for a hole. That 
which has its rind downwards, that is fitted for a hole ; such a one ® he 
should not wish ; that which has its rind pointing up, and is rich in wood ^ 


1 RV. iii. 8. 1. 

* RV. iii. 8. n ; 2 ; 6 ; i. 86. 13 ; 14. 

» RV. iii. 8. 4. 

< RV. iii. 8. 10. 

^ For the construction see Delbriick, Altind, 
Synt p. 87. 

« This Ccf. AB. iii. 46 ; vii. 26, 30) is the 
most probable sense of dga here. The 


Anand. ed. has dsdnyeydt ! 
sa dravyafy seems almost certainly to be read, 
though only by conjecture, kdmam is not 
certain in sense but most probably may 
be taken as above : he may use it. For 
pr<Mavydfy ctpraeavif x. 3, for which BR, 
(iv. 1094) suggest *^$alavi ; the sense is cer- 
tain. 



[ — X. 3 


406] The Animal Sacrifice 

is that connected with man ; he may use it if he desires ; the tree, whose 
rind grows from left to right in accord with the course of the sun, is that 
suited for the post and is heavenly. (The tree), which stands alone, 
unrivalled, or is covered up to the root with shoots, is not bare; it is 
connected with cattle ; it one desiring cattle should use.® 

X. 3. He who is consecrated enters the jaws of Agni and Soma ; in that 
on the fast day he offers a victim to Agni and Soma, this is a buying off 
of himself ^ ; with this buying off of himself he becomes free from debt 
and then sacrifices. So he should not eat of it, for it is man in counterfeit. 
But they say ‘Every oblation is a buying off of oneself; he would not 
eat of any oblation, if he were not willing to eat because it is a buying off 
of oneself. Therefore at will should one eat 2 .* Agni and Soma are day and 
night ; in that by day they proceed with (the offering of) the omentum, 
thereby is day pleased. In that the offering to Agni is carried out during 
the night, thereby is the night as connected with Soma pleased. ‘ That is 
the final setting free of day and night ’ (they say) ; by the sacrifice are day 
and night set free; they do not obtain him, who knowing thus offers 
this victim. They say ‘ It should be two coloured ; white and black with 
the symbols of day and night ; or white and red with the symbols of Agni 
and Soma.’ There are eleven fore-offerings and eleven after-offerings, and 
eleven supplementary offerings; these are thirty- three ; all the gods are 
thirty-three ; verily (they serve) to delight all the gods. The fore-offerings 
are expirations, the after-offerings inspirations ; therefore are they alike, 
for the expirations and the inspirations are similar. They say ‘Why 
does he sacrifice with a Rc in the fore -offerings and with the opening 
words only in the after-offerings?’ ‘The fore-offerings are seed to be 
poured, the after-offerings are seed to be deposited ; therefore with a Ro 
he sacrifices in the fore-offerings, and with the opening words in the 
after-offerings.’ In that he says the last whole, verily thus he places the 
sacrificer in the world of heaven. He invokes with the Apri verses ; with 
the whole self, with the whole mind, he gathers together the sacrifice, 
who sacrifices. The self of him becomes empty as it were ; he fills it up 
for him with these (verses). In that he fills it up, therefore are they 

* The position of va makes it clear that it (VOJ. xxiii. 63) remarks on the obscurity 

contrasts the tree with shoots and that of the passage, but offers no help, 

with no other trees near it, and calls ^ For this idea cf. Schwab, Das altindischs 
both pa^vya as contrasted with the Thiercpfer, p. xix ; Keith, Taittirvya Sam- 

merely svargya tree. It is quite clear hitdy pp. cyi seq. See AB. ii. 8. 
that ^hhrdtrvyah is to be read and taken ^ There is no iti to make clear the end of the 
with ekasthxil^. The Anand. ed. here is argument, but it is doubtless here. Cf. 

very careless, having seaj/uin/asva, and like KB. x. 1, n. 3 ; xii. 7, n. 6; xvii. 1; 

Lindner it reads bhrdtrvyah, Oaland xxiv. 8 ; xxv. 8. 



[406 


X. 3 — The Soma Sacrifice 

called Apris (fillers). He surrounds the animal with fire, to smite away 
the Raksases ; Agni is the smiter away of the Raksases ; he carries the 
fire round thrice from left to right ; that is as if Agni were to put three 
forts. Therefore, ‘ Go round again ’ he should say to the Agnidh, if he 
desire of a man, ‘ May he not fall away.’ 

X. 4. ‘ O ye divine slayers and ye human make ready ; bring (the 
victim) to the doors of the sacrifice, ordaining the sacrifice for the two 
lords of the sacrifice’; regarding this^ some say, ‘The lord of the 
sacrifice is the sacrificer.’ ‘ What man (is the lord) 1 ’ he should say, 

‘ the lord of the sacrifice is the deity only.’ ‘ Its bends are twenty-six ’, 
(he says) ; the bends are the ribs. On both sides of the blood he breathes 
down, (thinking) ‘ The Raksases have the blood as their share | let me not 
set away the share of the gods with the share of the Raksases.’ It is 
the Adhrigu (formula). The instruction is ‘Do not mutilate the limbs.’ 
What is unspoilt is the oblation of the gods ; they do not eat the oblation 
which is spoilt. Nine times does he breathe down in the Adhrigu ; the 
breaths are nine ; verily thus he places breaths in the sacrificer, to secure 
full life in this world and immortality in yonder world. Thrice * he utters 
the concluding verse, to avoid non-recurrence. He says one before ; the 
fathers are one as it were ; the victim has as it were the fathers for its 
deity when it is being offered. In that he says three after, and among 
the gods (things are) thrice, verily thus he makes it have the gods as its 
deities, and renews it. Having concluded he mutters inaudibly, ‘Both 
and he that is not evil ’ ; the slayer of the gods is not evil ; ® to him verily 
does he hand it over, for he knows the gods. 

X. 5. Then he recites (the verses) accompanying the drops ; * verily with 
them he makes the drops suitable for Agni. These are the invitatory 
verses for them, these the offering verses. Therefore they are appropriate. 
Having proceeded with the (offering to the) calls of Hail I they proceed 
with the (offering of the) omentum ; verily thus they make the fore- 
offerings sharers in the victim. He should not utter speech between the 
(offering to the) calls of Hail! and the (offering of the) omentum, 


1 For the. Mantra see Schwab, pp. 102 seq . ; 
99s. V. 17. 1-9. There are nine Mantras 
for the Hotr in the Adhrigu. The account 
in AB. ii. 6 , 7 is fuller. 

* adhrigo ^mldhvam su^mi ^mWivam ^mldhvam 

adhrigo 3, 99 S. v. 17. 10. 

* Haug's ingenious view that apdpa - apa, apa 

addressed to the slaughterer, though in 
consonance with probability, is not sup- 
ported by any real evidence, and the ex- 


planation of the word as a symbol of 
deprecation of sin in the slayer is equally 
good, and accords with the use of such 
terms as ^amitr and samj^iapaya, 

X. 6. ^ For the ritual see 99®« 1-19. 12. 

The Puroda 9 a offering follows the norm 
of the Istis, i. e. the new and full moon 
sacrifices, and the Svistakrt offering is 
one of a cake. 



407] The Animal Sacrifice [ — ^x. 6 

(thinking) ‘The calls of Hail I are the breaths; the omentum is the body; 
let me not separate the breaths and the body by anything.’ In 
that the invitatory verses of the victim for Agni and Soma are Anustubh 
verses, (it is because) the Anustubh is the Gayatri and the metre of Agni 
is the Gayatri ; in that the offering verses are Tristubh verses, it is because 
the Tristubh is the metre of the lordly power, and Soma is the lordly 
power. Thus according to the metre he delights the two deities. During 
the offering of the victim a cake is offered;* the cake is the sap of 
animals ; verily thus he makes (the victim) full of sap and fit for sacrifice. 
Where a cake in connection with the victim is offered, the SvisUkrt 
of the cake (offering) is permanent ; the Svistakrt is Agni (the unmoved) ; * 
therefore it becomes permanent. Having recited (a verse) of Vi9vamitra, 
as the invitatory verse for the cake Svistakrt, he recites (a verse) of 
Vifvamitra as the offering verse; the cake is the continuity of the 
sacrifice ; Vi^vamitra is speech ; by speech the sacrifice is continued. 

X. 6. Then he recites the Manota.^ All the deities gather towards the 
victim as it is offered, (thinking) ‘ He will utter my name ; ho will utter 
my name.’ The minds of all these are woven in the victim; these he 
delights herein ; so it is not in vain that all these have assembled together. 
They say ‘ Since the victims are offered to diverse deities, then why does 
he accompany that for Agni alone ? ’ ‘ Three are the Manotas of the gods ; 
Agni is the Manota of the gods, for in him the minds of the gods are 
woven. Moreover, speech is the Manota of the gods, for in it are their 
minds woven. Moreover, the cow is the Manota of the gods, for in her 
are their minds woven. All the Manotas are Agni ; in Agni the Mnnoffts 
unite; therefore he accompanies that for Agni only’ (is the answer). 
They make up thirteen; thirteen are the cuttings of the victim; these 
he accompanies.* (He recites) the first thrice and the last thrice ; they 
make up seventeen; Prajapati is seventeenfold; that rite is beneficial 
which is commensurate with Prajapati. He recites seventeen kindling 
verses; Prajapati is seventeenfold; that rite is beneficial which is 


* The construction as tho sentence stands is 
an accusative absolute^ but it is obvious, 
as Lindner points out, that ^nunirupyate 
must be read. Curiously enough the 
same change is not suggested by Lindner 
below, where it is certain as nunirupyate 
is found in OLC, na nirupyate in Anand. 
ed. and W w B K, and na nirupyeta in b, 
and the reading which ho adopts 

only in M. na nirupyate could be rendei*ed, 


but the sense is not better than that given 
by *nunirupyate, 

® acyiUafy (cf. KB. x. 6) goes with the preced- 
ing words, but it also applies to Agni, 
who is the connecting link in the argu- 
ment. Read puro^gasvistakrt, 

1 RV. Vi. 1 ; see ffS. V. 9. 18. Cf. also KB. 
xii. 8. 

* This is doubtless the real force of samava- 
dyati : he shares in the making portions 
{avadyati) of the victim by his recitation. 



X. 6 — ] The Soma Sacrifice [408 

commensurate with Prajapati. When the victim is offered, then the lord 
of the forest is unmoved; the lord of the forest is Agni, he bestows 
the oblation on the gods; therefore he becomes unmoved; he also 
has milk as his portion; so Agni becomes a sharer in all the oblations. 
They say ‘ Since the gods possess the solid then why does the lord of the 
forest possess the liquid as his share?’ ‘The gods shared the solid 
of the sacrifice, the fathers the liquid ; the victim has, as it were, the 
fathers as its deities; the milk has the fathers as its deities; therefore 
is it’, he should reply. They say ‘Why in the Soma sacrifice do they 
offer two libations for the chousing ^ (of priests), and not in the Havir- 
yajna ? * ‘ The Haviryajna is an incomplete sacrifice ; the Soma sacrifice 

is a complete sacrifice ; therefore at the Soma sacrifice alone do they offer 
the two libations for the choosing and not at the Haviryajna’ (is the 
answer). He offers in the first case with the call of Hail 1 ‘ Acceptable 
to speech may I become, acceptable to the lord of speech ; O divine speech, 
what of thy speech is sweetest, in that us may he ® to-day place ; hail to 
Sarasvatl.’ Thus he releases speech; therefore hence onwards speech 
being released supports the sacrifice ; with the mind (he accompanies) the 
second (libation) ; for by mind is mind delighted. 


ADHYAYA XI 

The Soma Sacrifice {continued) 

The Prdtaranuvdka. 

xi. 1. Next^ comes the morning litany. In that he recites it in the 
morning, that is why the morning litany has its name. In that he mutters 
the formulae of recourse, in that he offers the libations, verily thus he 
produces a benediction. After uttering the sound kin he recites the 
morning litany; the sound hin is a thunderbolt; verily thus with a 
thunderbolt he smites the evil of the sacrificer. He should recite aloud 
in a clear tone. The clear is the one part of speech which is not infested 
by evil ; therefore in a clear tone should he recite, to smite away the evil 
of the sacrificer. By half verses should he recite ; these worlds are com- 

* dhama and pathah here seem necessarily to ® See TS. iii. 1. 10. 1 with Keith’s note. 

have some such sense {pd ‘ drink ’ ^x- ' For the morning litany see AB. ii. 15-18. 

plaining pdthafy) ; read abhajanta. Cf. For the ritual see 55S. vi. 2 The 

ZDMGl. liv. 508. formulae of recourse are a series bhui^ 

* For these libations see 99S. vi. 9. 16-18 ; prapadye, &c., said before the Agnidh’s 

Caland and Henry, VAgniitoma, p. 186. altar. 



409] 


The Prataranuvaha 


[ — xi. 4 

mensurate with the Rc; the first half verse is this world, the second 
yonder world; what is between the two half verses is the atmosphere 
here. In that he recites by half verses, verily thus he makes the 
sacrificer to prosper with these worlds ; verily thus he places the sacrificer 
in these worlds. 

xi. 2. ‘ Now the Pankti has five feet ; how is it recited by half verses? ’ 
(they ask). The syllable om is the third with the last two; so is it 
recited by half verses. He recites the service ^ to Agni ; thus he obtains 
this world; he recites that to Usas; verily thus he obtains the world 
of the atmosphere ; he recites that to the Alvins ; verily thus he obtains 
yonder world. He recites a Gayatrl; the Gayatri is the mouth; he 
recites an Anustubh ; the Anustubh is speech ; thus he places speech in 
the mouth ; by the mouth he utters speech. He recites a Tristubh ; the 
Tristubh is might and strength ; verily thus he places might and strength 
in the sacrificer. He recites a Brhati ; the Brhati is cows and horses ; 
he recites a Usnih ; the Usnih is sheep and goats ; he recites a Jagatl ; 
the Jagati is might and strength ; the Tristubh is might and strength in 
the front ; the Jagati is might and strength behind ; 

xi. 3. in the middle are cattle connected with the Brhati and the Usnih ; 
verily thus with might and strength he encircles the cattle on both sides 
and confers them upon the sacrificer. So from the sacrificer cattle 
are not likely to depart. Just as in this world men eat cattle, just as 
they enjoy them, so in yonder world cattle eat men, so they enjoy them. 
He wins them here with the morning litany ; won here they eat him not 
in yonder world, they enjoy him not in requital. Just as he eats 
them in this world, just as he enjoys them, so in yonder world he eats 
them, so he enjoys them. He recites a Pankti verse; the Pankti is 
a support ; verily thus in all creatures he makes the sacrificer find 
support. 

xi. 4. Now all the gods resort to the Hotr as he is about to recite the 
morning litany, expecting ‘With me will he commence, with me will 
he commence.* If he were to commence indicating one deity, he would 
fall a victim to the other deities. He commences with (a verse) not 
addressed (to one deity) ; thereby he does not fall a victim to any deity. 
(With the verse), ^ ‘O waters, the rich ones* he commences; all the deities 
are the waters ; verily thus with all the deities he commences. ‘ Advancing 

^ The recitation ends with o d, which counts ritually : cf. the vision of Bhrgu in the 

here as the sixth Pada ; 993* ^ 44-48 (Oertel, JAOS. 

* For these see 99®* 234-238; xxvi. 196); Ldvi, La doctrine 

xi. 3. ^ A rare and interesting passage on du ecuciriJUxj pp. 100-102. 

moral retribution, regarded as usual xi. 4. ^ RV. x. 30. 12. 

52 [ h .0.8. 25] 



[410 


xi. 4—] The Soma Sacrifice 

forward up to the sacrifice’, (with this)^ he continues. is the 

symbol of this world, ‘ advancing * is that of yonder (world) ; ‘ up ’ is the 
symbol of Agni, 'advancing^ is that of yonder sun; so in all the for- 
mulae of recourse, in all the services to Agni, to XJsas, and to the A 5 vins the 
first utterance is the symbol of Agni, the second that of yonder sun. 
There are varied metres and between them pits as it were ; these two 
are the strongest, the uninjured, the untroubled, deities; with these 
two he commences. With the one hymn ® should he mount ; that is the 
symbol of mounting without falling into a pit and is heavenly. When 
there occurs in the one hymn a difference of authorship, then without 
taking breath should he step over. Breath is immortality ; thus by 
immortality he passes by death ; just as one steps over a pit by means 
of a beam or a roller,^ so with the Pranava he steps over ; the Prana va 
is holy power; verily thus with the holy power he continues the holy 
power. 

xi. 5. The Pranava^ should be uttered pure for those who desire offspring, 
with m at the end for those who desire support. ‘ The Pranava should 
have m at the end some say, but the rule is that it should be used pure. 
The Pranava is investigated as to the fact that ‘ Here it is pure, here 
it is in full form ‘ The Pranava should be pure in the middle of Qastras 
and of recitations Kausitaki used to say. Thus is continuity. It 
should have m at the end for the sake of a pause ; the pause is a support ; 
verily (it serves) for a support. Verily (the two serve) to obtain both 
desires. These are the carryings of the metres ; they carry the subsequent 
over the preceding metre. No harm^ befalls him, who by the metre is 
carried over ® the metre. ‘ When he is passing over, he should pierce with 
Ilia mind as it were him whom he hates ; in the fractures of the metre 
he either goes to ruin or is crushed/ so he used to say. The Panktis at 
the end of the offerings he recites with the same endings; the end is 
sap, the metres are cattle ; verily thus the metres end in sap ; cattle 
ending as it were rejoice in the good grass. This is a Viraj with one 
syllable short; with one twice repeated it is exactly a Viraj; with one 
thrice repeated there is one over the Viraj. 


* RV. i. 74, 1 (also in KB. xxii. 1). 

* The three hratus have parts in Gayatrl, 

Anustubh, Tristubh, Brhatl, Usnih, 
Jagatl, Fahkti. Hence there are breaks 
in the metre ; but in the case of the 
samdrohaniya verses they are all to be 
treated as in a single hymn, disregarding 
differences of hymn {aiseyd). On this 
plan the occurrence of gartas is avoided. 


For the verses which are reduced to 360 
by some see Anartlya on 55S. vi. 6. 89 aeq. 
^ Something flat, like a board, is clearly 
meant. The Anand. ed. reads martyencu 
^ i. e. 0 8 not o 3 m, 

3 dptihk is read in the Anand. ed. 

^ The sense is doubtful, but nothing better 
seems possible as the text stands in the 
MSS. and edd. 



411] 


The Prdtaranuvdka 


[ — xi. 8 


xi. 6. Three desires are there in the sacrifice, that in its completion, 
that in its deficiency, that in its superabundance. The complete part of the 
sacrifice is heavenly, the defective food, the superabundant serves for genera- 
tion. Verily thus here the sacrificer obtains all desires. He concludes with 
(a verse) containing a benediction ^ ‘Usas with her ruddy kine hath 
appeared ' ; verily thus he utters a benediction for cattle. So cattle are 
not likely to stray from the sacrificer. At this verse he lets out his voice ^ ; 
thus he announces him to the gods, ‘ He has been born,' for in it is he bom. 
He repeats (the verse of two Padas, ‘ With this let us win the prize set by 
the gods ' ; the Metres increasing by four (syllables) are cattle ; (the verses) 
with two Padas are the sacrificer’s metre ; verily thus he places the sacri- 
ficer in command of cattle ; man stands over cattle, as it were. He recites 
the thrice seven metres of the services ; that makes up twenty-one ; the 
fourfold Stoma, the highest of the Stomas, is the twenty-onefold ; thus he 
obtains the highest of the Stomas. In that there are twenty-one, the 
months are twelve, the seasons five, these worlds three, and the sun yonder 
the twenty-first, verily thus he fixes the sacrificer in unity of world with 
him. 

xi. 7. They say ‘ Seeing that there are these kindling verses of the 
Haviryajna or the animal sacrifice, then what are those of the Soma sacri- 
fice ? ' ‘ The morning litany he should reply, for by the syllables of the 
others he seeks to obtain the year, by the Res here. A hundred ^ only 
should he recite ; man has a hundred (years of) life ; verily thus he confers 
life upon him. He should recite a hundred and twenty ; the days of 
a season are one hundred and twenty ; thus he obtains the season ; by the 
season the year, and the desires that are in the year. He should recite 
three hundred and sixty ; the days of the year are three hundred and sixty ; 
verily (they serve) to obtain the year. He should recite seven hundred and 
twenty ; seven hundred and twenty are there of the days and nights of the 
year ; thus he obtains the days and nights of the year. A thousand should 
he recite ; a thousand is all, the morning litany is all ; thus all he obtains 
with all, who knows thus. But Kausitaki used to say ‘ The morning litany 
is Prajapati ; Prajapati is incommensurable ; who ought to measure it ? ’ 
This is the rule: 

xi. 8. They say ‘ Since the hymns are recited in the Sadas, then why 
does he recite the morning litany at the two oblation holders ? ’ The two 


1 RV. V. 75. 9. 

* i. e. he goes from the middle to the highest 
tone, 99 s. vi. 6. 15. 

8 RV. vi. 17. 15. 

xi. 7. ^ The 100 verse form is given in the 


Aitareya tradition from a Prayoga by 
Caland and Henry, p. 131; the 120 and 360 
and 720 verso forms i n Anartly a’s common-^ 
tary on v. 6. 41 in lieu of the 1,000 
verse form laid down in the Sutra itself. 



[412 


xi. 8—] The Soma Sacrijice 

oblation holders are the head of the sacrifice ; the metres are the breaths ; 
thus he places breath in the head. In the Sadas the hymns a,re recited ; 
the Sadas is the stomach ; the hymns are food ; proper food is suited for the 
stomach. As is a cart, so is the sacrifice in counterfeit ; as the com, so the 
morning litany ] as the vessels, so the hymns. If a man recites a little 
just as vessels cottie together (in a cart) with a little corn only, so his hymns 
come together, and on account of the coming together of the hymns totter- 
ing is liable to befall the sacrificer ; therefore should he repeat many ; thus 
he makes strong the hymns. (He says) ‘ Let the benediction of the sacri- 
fice as successful be obtained for me ’ ; the benediction of the sacrifice as 
successful is the sacrificer’s. Three are these sets of a thousand in the 
sacrifice, the morning litany, the A 5 vina’ litany, and the great litany.^ He 
should begin when night is far advanced,® before the emission of speech, 
before the time when cattle, men, and birds take up speech ; speech these 
creatures make to swell, in that they lie silent (thinking) ‘ Let us first 
prosper on speech, swollen, not dissipated.’ Between the morning litany 
and the Upah^u and Antaryama cups he should not set free his speech 
(thinking) ‘ The Upah^u and Antaryama cups are expiration and inspira- 
tion ; the morning litany is speech ; let me not separate expiration and 
inspiration and speech by any other thing.’ Some begin with ‘ 0 waters, ye 
wealthy ones ’, after muttering (thinking) ‘ This is a yoking of the metres ® ’ ; 
but the rule is ‘ He should not insert anything before the words ‘ O waters, 
ye wealthy ones ’, to prevent him being laid low. 


ADHYAYA XII 

The Soma Sacrifice {continued). 

The Aponaptrlya. 

xii. 1. The ’ waters are the sacrifice ; in that they come to the waters, 
verily thus they come to the sacrifice. Moreover the waters are strength 
and sap.® Verily thus they unite the sacrifice with strength and sap. 


^ The reading of M. maMvratam Hi eiad uktham 
is a good example of the glosses which 
are found here and there in that MS. 

* mahardtram in W w O b is a common error 
before u (pakurydt\ and is kept in the 
Anand. ed. 

8 These words seem (despite the silence of 
the Vedic Concordance) to be intended to 


bo the matter muttered, unless it Is a 
title of some text, or unless wo take it as 
‘having muttered (thinking) “This is a 
yoking of the metres 

xii. 1. ^ For the Aponaptrlya see AB. ii. 19, 20. 
For the ritual see 99®* 1-19. 

* The reading is certainly urjaiva despite the 
errors of the MSS., urjenaiva (so the 



413 ] 


The Aponaptrlya [ — xii. 2 

Moreover, the waters are immortality ; verily thus he confers immortality 
upon himself. Now aforetime the Kaksases, confounders of the sacrifice, 
used to watch the waters at the fords; then whosoever came to the 
waters they killed them all ; then Kavasa saw this hymn of fifteen verses,^ 
‘ Forth among the gods let there be speeding for the Brahman ’ ; he recited 
it ; thereby he smote away the confounders of the sacrifice, the Raksases, 
from the fords; thence since then they return in safety and uninjured 
from the sacrifice.^ Yonder in the waters the Adhvaryu offers a libation ; 
then should he accompany this (with the verse ®), ‘ Send forth our sacrifice 
with divine offering.^ This is the offering verse for this (libation), being 
appropriate by containing (the word) ‘ offering \ (He recites ®) ‘ Winding 
hitherward, those of two streams,* when (the waters) are being brought ; 
‘ What time the waters are seen coming forward,’ when they are discerned ; 
‘ Some come together ; others come up,* ® as they come up ; some waters 
come, others come up ; " Like the waters divine, they come up to the vessel 
of the ofiering ’,® as they are poured down into the Hotr’s bowl ; ‘ May the 
cows with milk eager for the end the cows are the waters, for the 
waters impel all this (universe). The Adhvaryu stands turned towards the 
Hotr ; the Hotr asks him, * O Adhvaryu, hast thou found the waters ? ’ 
‘ Hast thou found the sacrifice ? ’ verily thus he says to him. ‘ They have 
indeed condescended’^^ he replies ; ‘We have found what we have sought 
in these waters ; for this they have condescended,’ verily thus he says to 
him. Being answered the Hotr begins the Nigada; the Nigada is strength 
and sap ; verily strength and sap he places in the oblation by means of the 
Nigada. 

xii. 2. ^ The mothers go with the paths ’ (he recites ^) ; the mothers are 
the waters, for he praises the waters as they go. ‘ They have come, rich, 
with living gifts ’ (he recites when they have come up. He concludes with 


Anand. ed.) aurjenaiva (M), urjam eva. 
This episode, according to Weber (/nd. 
Stud, X. 168, n. 1), may refer to attacks by 
the aborigines on the Aryan invaders. 
The reading of M ^ccha yanti is obviously 
to be restored in the text for ucchrayanti ; 
cf. Caland, VOJ. xxiii. 63. 

3 RV. X. 80. 

* svasiir istydh is hardly correct, as svastih as 
nom. is not natural since it leaves no 
qualiheation of the sentence istyah^ &c. ; 
the readings of M svasly arista and K 
svasty aristya point to a possible original 
svasty arista istydh. The Anand. ed. has 
svasU ristydfy. 


® RV. X. 80. 10. 

8 RV. X. 80. 11. 

7 RV. X. 80. 13. 

8 RV. ii. 35. 3. The waters mixed are the 

Vasativari's with those in the Maitra* 
varuna^s bowl. 

0 RV. V. 43. 1. 

JO RV. V. 48. 1. 

M has tad dhotem anannamur iti, AB. ii. 20. 
12 has anamnamuhy and avef^ in the question 
in the Mantra, glossed by avidah, the two 
imperfects being natural. 

J RV. i. 23. 16. 

2 RV. X. 30. 14. 



xii.2 — ] The Soma Sacrijice [414 

(a verse®) containing the word ‘across’, ‘ The waters have arrived, eager, to 
this strew.’ He recites appropriate (verses) ; what in the sacrifice is appro- 
priate, that is perfect ; verily (they serve) for the perfection of the sacrifice. 
The morning litany had been recited, the hymns had not been obtained* ; at 
this conjunction the Asuras went against them; the gods, perceiving in 
fear, saw this thriceforged thunderbolt ; ‘ The waters * is the first form of the 
thunderbolt ; ‘ Sarasvati ’ is the second form of the thunderbolt ® ; this * is 
a hymn of fifteen verses, that is the third form of the thunderbolt. The 
gods with the thriceforged thunderbolt pushed away the Asuras from these 
worlds ; verily thus also the sacrificer pushes away with this thriceforged 
thunderbolt the rivals who hate him from these worlds. 

xii. 3. The* Madhyamas performed a session on the SarasvatL Then 
Kav&% sat down in the midst, they said to him, ‘ Thou art the son of 
a female slave ; we will not eat with you.’ He rushing on in anger praised 
the Sarasvati with this hymn ; she followed after him ; thereupon they 
felt themselves free from passion ® ; they went after him and said ‘ O seer, 
homage be to thee ; harm us not ; thou art of us the best, seeing that she 
follows after thee.’ Thus they informed him ; they removed his anger. 
This is the greatness of Kavasa and the founder of the hymn (is he). In that 
they go with their wives, (it is because) the Gandharvas as commissioners * 
in the waters guard the Soma of Indra. They love women, and they turn 
their minds towards them ; so it is as if one might take the sacrifice of 
careless persons. The sacrifice condescends to him who knows thus. He 
recites twenty (verses) ; they make up the Viraj ; the waters are connected 
with the Viraj, the Viraj is food, the waters are food ; thus by food he 
causes proper food to abound. (He recites) the first thrice, and the last 
thrice ; they make up twenty-four ; the Gayatri has twenty-four syllables ; 
the Gayatri supports the morning pressing ; thus the waters contain the 
symbol of the morning pressing. So much for the Aponaptriya. 


’ RV. X. 80. 16. 

* aprdptd is read in the Anand. ed. as well as 
in the MSS., except M, used by Lindner, 
but as an active it is doubtful ; and it is 
difficult to trust the MSS. and M is very 
often right. Cf. Delbruck, Altvid, SynU, 
pp. 382 seq, ; KB xxix. 8, n. 3. 

« RV. X. 30. 12. 

« i. e. RV. X. 30. 

^ For the Md,dhyama Rsis see AGS. iii. 4. 


For this chapter see AB. ii. 19 ; cf. the 
Chftgaleya Upanisad, Weber, Ind. Stud, 
ix. 42>46. 

* nirdga iva is rendered by Haug (Aitareya 
Brdkmamy ii. 112, n. 1) as if nirdga (sin- 
less) iti were read of Kavasa, but this 
cannot very naturally be so taken. 

s pratydhitdh in M is a clear case of a gloss 
ousting the text ; cf. AJP xxxvi. 257, 258. 
Like nirdgaj the word is late. 



416] 


The Upahgu and Antaryama Cu^s 


[ — xii. 5 


The Updhgu and Antaryama Gups. 

xii. 4. The' Upah^u (cup) is expiration ; as it is offered he should breathe 
forth along it (saying) ' Protect my expiration, quicken my expiration ; 
hail I Thee of fair birth to the sun I ’ This is its call of vasat and its call of 
Hail I These libations go not to the gods over which the vasat call or 
the call of Hail I is not pronounced. Inspiration is the Antaryama (cup) ; 
as it is offered he should breathe down along it (saying) ‘ Protect my 
inspiration, quicken my inspiration ; hail ! Thee of fair birth to the sun 1 ' 
This is its call of vaaat, and its call of Hail ! These libations go not to the 
gods over which the vasal call or the call of Hail 1 is not pronounced. The 
Upahfu and Antaryama are expiration and inspiration ; one of these 
they offer when the sun has risen, the other before the sun has risen ; 
verily thus they separate expiration and inspiration ; therefore expira- 
tion and inspiration, though being together, are separate as it were, ‘ In 
that they offer one when the sun has risen and the other before the sun has 
risen, verily thus from day and night they obstruct ^ the Asuras, for on 
both sides of yonder sun are day and night, and the sacrificer (obstructs) 
evil,' so he used to say.^ He for whom they offer both (cups) after the sun 
has risen or before the sun has risen is a sacrificer with water, not a sacri- 
ficer with Soma ; he for whom these two are offered in their order is a real 
sacrificer with Soma.* So for the Upan 9 u and Antaryama (cups). 

The Sarpana. 

xii. 5. ‘ Should ' the Pavamana be followed up or not 1 ' (they ask). ‘ It 
should not be followed up,' they say. The abode of the Rc is where the 
Hotr stands ; that of the Saman where they yonder sing the Saman. He 
who follows up removes ^ the Rc from its own abode, and makes the Rc 
a follower of the Saman. Therefore he should not follow up, (thinking) 
* Let me not remove the Rc from its own abode ’ and ‘ Let me not make the 


' For the two cups see AB. ii. 21. For the 
ritual see 99^* 

* All the HSS. of Lindner and the Anand. ed. 

have antarayantif a denominative form 
not found certainly before the classical 
period. 

* va is possibly «ra/ here, but vd may be ‘ or’. 

Of. KB. xvi. 9, n. 5. 

* The reading of all MSS. but M, and of the 

Anand. ed. somay^ittii may be correct, 
the first iti being a dictum of Kausitaki 
as above, but the simpler reading of M is 


perhaps better, as often ; so the comm. 

xii. 5. ^ For this rule regarding the participa- 
tion of the Hotr in the movement of the 
other priests to the place for the perfor- 
mance of the Sftman and the eating there 
of a caru see AB. ii. 22. 99^* 

gives the ritual for the Bahispavam&na 
and in 14 the Mantra for the Hotr as 
here. 

^ For cydvayati (in M also) there is a parallel 
in PB. and it need not therefore be 
corrected. 



[416 


xii. 6 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

Rc a follower of the Ssman/ But, if (the sacrificer) be also the Hotr, he 
should follow up, for to him falls the duty of a chorister, (thinking) ‘ The 
Svarasaman ^ is the world of heaven ; let me place myself in the Svara- 
saman, the world of heaven.’ Then (they ask) ‘All the gods rejoice 
together in the morning in the Pavamana ; how then is it not then com- 
pletely consumed ? * When the Pavamana has been sung, he should mutter 
the following, ‘ Invoked are the gods for the eating of this Soma, the puri- 
fying, the discerning ; let the gods invoke me for the eating of this Soma, 
the purifying, the discerning ; with mind thee I eat ; with speech thee I eat; 
with breath thee I eat ; with the eye thee I eat ; with the ear thee I eat.’ 
This is the joint invocation with the gods. So by him yonder Soma, 
the king, the discerning, the moon, the food, is eaten, that food yonder 
which the gods eat. 

The Animal Sacrifice {continued). 

xii. 6. Now ^ as to the victim. The victim is clearly Soma, for if it were 
not offered it would be as it were a water drinking ; thereby he makes firm 
the pressings. In that they proceed with the omentum, thereby is the 
morning pressing made firm ; in that they cook, in that they proceed with 
the cake at the animal sacrifice, thereby is the midday pressing made firm ; 
in that they proceed with this (victim) at the third pressing, thereby is the 
third pressing made firm. This is the making firm of the pressings. The 
deities who drink the Soma and those who share the victim — there are 
thirty-three Soma drinking deities who depend on the Soma libations, 
eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, twelve Adityas, Indra as the thirty-second, 
Prajapati as the thirty-third ; then also thirty-three who share the victim — 
both of these sets are delighted. Of this (victim) which is offered some say 
‘ It should be for Indra and Agni saying ‘ All the gods are Indra and 
Agni ; thus by it he delights all the gods.’ But others say ‘ This (victim) 
should be for Agni, the cakes are for Indra; thus Indra and Agni have 
equal shares.’ ‘ Agni’s is the morning pressing , this (victim) is offered at 
the morning pressing; they take for another that which is Agni’s who 
make it have another for its deity ; it is as if one were to take for another 
what is another’s ; further the year is alone for those who perform a 
session of a year, (the victim) is for Agni only ; it should not change,’ so some 
say. In the teaching (of Kausitaki) (the victim) is determined as for Agni; 

8 The Svaras&man is properly the S&man of plated (cf. KB. xii. 6). This or a similar 

the three days before and after the Visu- passage is cited in Ap^S. xii. 17. 2 from 

vant or central day in the Gavam Ayana, the Bahvrcabrahmana. 

the great sacrificial session, here contem- ^ For the ritual see 



417] The Animal Sacrifice [ — xii. 8 

xii. 7. The offering verse ^ for the omentum of the victim contains (the 
word) ‘ become ^ ‘Thou hast become the leader of the sacrifice and the 
region'; that* for the cake contains (the word) ‘pure’/ Forward to the pure 
radiance do ye bear ' ; that * for the oblation contains (the word) ‘ oblation ' 

‘ The singers urged by thought ‘ The set of eleven ^ they should arrange 
in order ’ is the rule. If (the sacrifice) is accompanied with Prsthyas in the 
invitation he issues invitations for the morning pressing (with the words), 

‘ Bring the gods to the sacrificer ; bring Agni, 0 Agni ; bring the lord of 
the forest ; bring Indra with the V asus ’ ; he issues invitations for the 
midday pressing (with the words), ‘ Bring Indra with the Budras * ; he 
issues invitations for the third pressing (with the words), ‘ Bring Indra with 
the Adityas, with the Rbhus, with the Vibhus, with Vaja, with Brhaspati, 
with the All-gods.’ Some include the lord of the forest in this invitation, 
saying ‘ At the end should (the lord of the forest) be invited, for they 
sacrifice to him at the third pressing/ As to this they say ® ‘ The victim 
is the body, the lord of the forests the breath ; if one there were to say of 
him, “ He hath separated the body from the breath, he shall not live ”, 
it would be so. Therefore in connexion with the victim the lord of the 
forest should be invited.’ The victim has been discussed. 

xii. 8, Prajapati having created offspring, felt himself empty as it were ; 
he pondered, ‘ How now can I sacrifice with such a sacrificial rite that* by 
sacrificing with it I shall obtain my desires and win proper food ? ' He saw 
the set of eleven (victims); he grasped it and sacrificed with it; having 
sacrificed with it he obtained his desires and won proper food ; verily thus 
also the sacrificer having sacrificed with this set of eleven obtains his 
desires, and wins proper food. Of this set of eleven the invitatory and 
offering verses are distinct and those for the oblation to Manota, but the 
rest is the same. The first is for Agni ; Agni is the holy power ; (it serves) 
to win the glory of the holy power. The second is for Sarasvati ; Sarasvati 
is speech ; by speech is food made sweet and eaten ; (it serves) to obtain 
proper food. The third is for Soma ; Soma is the lordly power ; (it serves) 
to win the glory of the lordly power. The fourth is for Pusan ; Pusan is 
food ; (it serves) to obtain proper food. The fifth is for Brhaspati ; Brhaspati 
is the holy power ; (it serves) to win the glory of the holy power. The 


' RV. X. 8. 6. 

* RV. vii. i. 1 (cited also in KB. xxvi. 8). 

8 RV. iii. 6. 1. 

* ekadapv^mt the reading of the comm., is 

clearly correct, Anusv&ra being easily 
omitted and of M being a facile 
correction. 

8 prsthyopdyam is perhaps more probable than 
53 [h.o. 8. 2«j 


prsthopdyamj as it thus refers naturally 
to a Sattra (cf. K£. xii. 6), 

8 As often no iti ends the quotation ; cf. KB. 

X. 1, 8 ; xvii. 1 ; xxiv. 8. 
xii. 8. ^ verses for the 

eleven victims which differ. For the 
Manot& oblation see KB. x. 6. 



xii. 8 — ] The Soma Sacrifice [418 

sixth is for the All-gods ; of all forms is food eaten ; (it serves) to obtain 
proper food. The seventh is for Indra ; Indra is the lordly power ; (it serves) 
to win the glory of the lordly power. The eighth is for the Maruts ; the 
Maruts are the waters ; the waters are food ; (it serves) to obtain proper 
food. The ninth is for Indra and Agni ; Indra and Agni are the holy and 
the lordly poweil3 ; (it serves) to win the glory of the holy power and the 
glory of the lordly power. The tenth is for Savitr ; instigated by Savitr is 
this food eaten ; (it serves) to win proper food. The eleventh is for Varuna ; 
Varuna is the lordly power ; (it serves) to win the glory of the lordly power. 
Thus Prajapati, by the holy power and the lordly power and by the lordly 
power and the holy power, kept encircling on both sides and winning proper 
food. Verily thus also the sacrificer, by the holy power and the lordly power 
and by the lordly power and the holy power, keeps encircling on both sides 
and winning proper food. 


ADHYAYA XIII 

The Soma Sacrifice {continued). 

The Creeping to the Sadas. 

xiii. 1. The ^ sacrifice is Prajapati ; in it are all desires, all immortality ; 
the altars are the protectors ; to them as he creeps ^ to the Sadas he pays 
homage, ‘ Homage, homage for the gods are not above receiving homage. 
They, having homage paid, let the Hotr pass on. He proceeds to this 
Prajapati, the sacrifice ; thus herein the sacrificer obtains all desires. 

The Set of Five Oblations. 

xiii. 2. Then ^ they proceed with the set of five oblations. The set of five 
oblations is cattle; verily (they serve) to obtain cattle. There are five 
oblations, curds, fried grains, groats, the cake, the milk mess. The Pankti 
has five Padas ; the sacrifice is fivefold ; cattle are fivefold ; man is fivefold ; 
for obtaining the sacrifice and cattle this is offered, also for the encircling 
of cattle and the making firm of the pressings. Breath is the set of five * 

* For the ritual see 99S. vi. 12 and 18. * correctly notes that the formal 

• The Anand. ed. has prasrpsyan. beginnings of the verses must be changed 

xiii. 2. ^ For the havi^anktisee AB. ii. 24. For to alter a praiifa into a yCljyd. 

the ritual see 99^> 1. 



419 ] Five Oblations and the Cakes [ — xiii. 3 

oblations ; therefore the Hotr utters as the offering verse the same formulae 
as the Maitravaruna for his directions ; for breath is the same. They say 
* The Rc which he uses in the morning as offering verse is wearied for that 
day ; then how is it fresh in all the pressings ? ' In that he continues to 
carry on with the pressings, (saying) ‘ In the morning, (the cakes) of the 
morning pressing *, at the morning pressing, ‘ Those of the midday pressing 
at the midday pressing, ‘ Those of the third pressing \ at the third pressing, 
thereby is it fresh They say ^ ‘ Why in the morning ^only is there a milk 
mess, and not in the midday or at the third pressing ? ’ ‘ The Maitravaruna 
is the sacrifice ; the sacrifice is bom at the morning pressing ; a young boy's 
portion is milk ; this is as if one should give the breast to a child on birth ; 
it is old at the other two pressings ; when one grows one is past the breast 
then. Therefore in the morning only is there a milk mess, and not in the 
midday nor at the third pressing ' (is the answer). 


The Cakes. 

xiii. 3. * O ^ Agni, enjoy the oblation,' he says at each pressing as the 
offering verse of the Svistakrt offering of the cake. Avatsara Prasravana ^ 
was the Hotr of the gods. To him in that glory death attached itself; 
death is Agni ; having delighted Agni by the oblation (saying), ‘ O Agni, 
enjoy the oblation,' he was set free. Verily thus also a Hotr, who knowing 
thus delights Agni by the oblation (saying) ^ O Agni, enjoy the oblation, 
is set free. Through these intermediate spaces the gods went to the world 
of heaven ; to them in that glory death attached itself ; death is Agni ; they 
having delighted Agni by the oblation (saying) ‘ O Agni, enjoy the oblation,* 
were set free. Verily thus also a Hotr who knowing thus delights Agni 
by the oblation (saying) ‘ O Agni, enjoy the oblation,' is set free. (The 
words), ' O Agni, enjoy the oblation,’ have six syllables ; this body has six 
members and is sixfold ; thus ransoming the self by the self, having become 
free of debt, he sacrifices. This is the Mantra of Avatsara Prasravana ; he 
should not think * By which now, by which shall I sacrifice ? ' ; he should 
know ‘ Let me sacrifice by the Mantra made by a Rsi, the Rc.' 

^ The variants of the ydjyds according to the * For the cakes of the pressings see AB. ii. 23. 
pressing make the decisive difference. For this point in the ritual, the ydjyd of 

The prai$as are given in Scheftelowitz, Di$ the Svistakrt offering, 99^. vii. 1. 8. 

Apo/crKp^«nd«5^S^da,p. 145, where ‘The v. 1. Prfi 9 ravana is supported hy 
sdvasya (cf. p. 147) occurs for prdtdfysava^ W w B b M K, the Anand. ed., and by 

nasya here ; so in the Prayogas and Max Muller’s MS. at least once. There 

Anand. ed. is the same variation in the name of the 

^ For this see AB. ii. 22. Plak§a Prasravana {Vedic IndeXf 8.V.). 



[420 


xiii. 4 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

xiii. 4. Now we have called the victim Soma ; and so the cakes. Ten are 
they, shoots of Soma ; the old shoot, which they press here ; the glad shoot, 
the waters ; the sap shoot, rice ; the male shoot, barley ; the bright shoot, 
milk; the living shoot, the victim; the immortal shoot, gold; the 'Re 
shoot; the Yajus shoot; the Sftman shoot; these are the ten Soma shoots; 
when all these unite, then is there Soma, then the pressed (Soma). 


The Cups for two Deities. 

xiii. 6. Having* proceeded with the cakes, they proceed with (the caps) 
for two deities. The cakes are the body of the sacrificer, (the cups) for 
two deities the breaths; in that having proceeded with the cakes, they 
proceed with (the cups) for two deities, verily thus they place * the breaths 
in the sacrificer, to secure fullness of life in this world and immortality in 
yonder world. So the sacrificer lives his full life in this world, he obtains 
immortality, imperishableness in the world of heaven. The first is for 
Indra and VSyu; Indra is speech, Vayu is breath; that for Mitra and 
Varuna is the eye ; that for the Alvins is the ear ; those for two deities are 
these breaths. Therefore without taking breath he utters the offering verse, 
for the continuity of the breaths, for these breaths are continuous as it were ; 
he does not utter the second wsat (thinking) ‘ Those for two deities are 
the breaths, the second vasat call marks the completion ; let me not before 
the time make the breaths completed for these breaths are yoked as it 
were. He places that for Indra and Vayu on the front side, for it of these 
breaths is designated as of the front side ; closer together as it were ® around 
the other two behind he deposits, for the eye and the ear are around this 
as it were. Them he continues to hold (thinking) 'Let them not start 
forward He does not cover (thinking) ‘ (The cups) for two deities are 
the breaths ; let me not cover the breaths.’ 

xiii. 6. ‘ This sweet Soma drink for thee ’ is the offering verse * of the 
Prasthitas, which distil sweetness, containing (the word) ‘sweet’. He 
utters a second vasat, for the appeasing of the libations, for the support 
of the libations. Then the Hotrakas sacrifice together ; verily thus they 


* For these cups, to Indra and Vftyu, Varuna 
and Mitra, and the Alvins, see AB. ii. 
25-28, 80. For the ritual see 95®. vii. 2 
and 8. 

‘ dadhdti is not so probable although it is 
possible, and has strong MS. support 
(W wOBK, Anand. ed., and Max Muller's 
MS.). Cf. below, xiii. 9. 

^ So abhidh&naiare is taken by Vinftyaka and it 


is probably thus to be rendered : ahhidhd- 
natah is less likely and does not explain 
the variant. 

♦ pravartantai is odd (Whitney, Sansk. Or. 
$ 737). 

xiii. 6. 1 For the Prasthitas and the Hotrakas* 
offerings and the eating of the libations 
see 99s. vii. 4 and 5. 



421] 


The Prasthitas 


[ — xiii. 8 


release the sacrificer from indebtedness.’ The first eating is that of (the 
cups) for two deities, then the sacrificial food, then the Hotr’s goblet. The 
cakes are the body of the sacrificer, (the cups) for two deities are the breaths ; 
the sacrificial food is cattle and food ; by food are the breaths and the body 
combined. Therefore the first eating is of (the cups) for two deities, then 
sacrificial food, then the Hotr's bowl. Them he gives to the Adhvaryu ; 
he does not let go (thinking) ‘ (The cups) for two deities are breaths ; let 
me not let go the breaths.’ Twice he eats of (the cup) for Indra and Vayu, 
for twice he utters the vci^t call for it ; once of (the cup) for Mitra and 
Varuna, once for that for the Alvins. Turning it round on all sides he eats 
of that for the Alvins, for by the ear he hears on all sides. The dregs 
he pours down on the Hotr’s bowl ; verily thus he makes them sharers in 
the sacrificial food. 

xiii. 7. Then ^ he invokes the sacrificial food ; carrying in his right hand 
the second (portion of the) sacrificial food he in the left holds together, but 
without allowing to touch, the Hotr’s bowl and the cup (thinking) ‘ The 
butter is a thunderbolt ; Soma is seed ; let me not harm seed by the thunder- 
bolt.’ He does not speak the formula of pouring * into it, he does not utter 
benedictions. Having invoked the sacrificial food and having sniffed it he 
pauses; he eats the second (portion of the) sacrificial food; then having 
sipped water he eats of the Hotr’s bowl. The Soma is the highest kind of 
proper food ; verily thus all, having invoked the highest kind of proper 
food, eat of it. 

xiii. 8. Next^ the response of the Achavaka. ‘These dear songs the 
sacrificer, the pourer, hath seized ; the Upavaktr is a support, the cows are 
invited by us (he should say), if he does not desire to invite ; ‘ He also is 
invited ’ he adds, if he desires to invite. The Achav&ka in response to the 
invitation should run over as many verses as he can of the hymn,’ ‘ Do ye 
stay, go not away.’ Or a Hotr (may do so) to an unwilling’ Achavftka. 
That is the expiation here. 


* anpiatiyai of M is possible as a dative of 
purpose, but is clearly a conjectural 
emendation. 

^ See above AB. iii. 7, n. 2. 

The sense of sunvat is very doubtful, and the 
phrase may be corrupt, 
xiii. 8. ^ For the response of the Ach^vSlka see 
99 s. vii. 6, 'where, however, the verse, BV. 
X. 19. 1, is attributed to the Achftv&ka if 
not invited. The use ofpratyupahavaisodd. 


* The reading of the KB. is certain but the 
sense most obscure ; Henry 
p. 221) suggests pratisthatotopavakta (99^* 
has ^opavakta)f but this is improbable. 
The rendering given assumes the reading 
pratiithopavakta \ for the Sandhi see 99^* h 
4. 5 i* vii. 14. 9. 

’ Gf. KB. XV. 8, n. 4. Read perhaps vd prati 
prate*. 



The Soma Sacrijice 


[422 


••• ^ 
Xlll. 9 — J 


The Seasonal Gups. 

xiii. 9. The ^ offerings to the seasons are the breaths ; in that they proceed 
with the offerings to the seasons, verily thus they place the breaths in the 
sacrificer. Breach is in three ways ordered, expiration, inspiration, cross- 
breathing, Six (priests) sacrifice (saying) ‘ With the season,’ verily thus they 
place expiration in the sacrificer ; four ‘ With the seasons ’ ; verily thus they 
place inspiration in the sacrificer ; twice (they sacrifice) afterwards, (saying) 
* With the season ’ ; verily thus they place cross-breathing in the sacrificer,* 
to secure fullness of life in this world and immortality in yonder (world). 
So the sacrificer lives a full life in this world and obtains immortality and 
imperishableness in the world of heaven. The offerings to the seasons are 
these breaths ; therefore without taking in breath they utter the offering 
verses, for the continuity of the breaths, for these breaths are continuous 
as it were. They do not say the second vasat (thinking) ‘ The offerings to 
the seasons are the breaths ; the second vasat call marks the completion ; 
let me not before the time make the breaths completed for these breaths 
are yoked as it were. They say * Why does he give directions to all (the 
priests) (in the words), ' Let the Hotr utter the offering verse, let the Hotr 
say the offering verse.’ The Hotr is speech ; he says in effect, ‘ Let speech 
utter the offering verse, let speech utter the offering verse.’ The seven 
Hotrs moreover are all these ; further it is said in a Rc,^ ‘ The seven Hotrs 
sacrifice according to due seasons.’ In that he arranges two afterwards, it 
is to avoid repetition. There are twelve; the year has twelve months; 
verily (it serves) to obtain the year. If he should eat then, and any one 
should say of him, ‘Food over which no second vasat has been said is 
unwholesome ; it has penetrated through his breaths,^ he will not live,’ so 
would it be. If he does not eat, and any one were to say of him, ' Food is 
breath; he has separated himself from breath, he will not live,’ so also 
would it be. He should smear as it were, and sniff it, both here and in 
the case of (the cups) for two deities ; this is the rule which they proclaim. 
In that these two Adhvaryus cross each other and neither interferes with 
the other, therefore season interferes not with season. 


^ For the offerings to the seasons see A6. ii. 

29. For the ritual see vii. 8, 

^ For dadhdtu see KB. xiii. 5. 

^ See VS. xxiii. 58 d\ the allusion here is 
omitted in the Vedk Concordance, 

* prdndn with vyagdt is difficult but not im- 


possible. There is no obvious correction 
save, of course, prdndt as with prdndt 
below, and possibly that should be read. 
On the other hand the acc. is found in 
AB. several times, apparently as * sepa- 
rate ^ and 80 destroy. 



423] 


[ — xiv. 2 


The Ajya Qastra 


ADHYAYA XIV 

The Soma Sacrifice (continued). 

The Ajya Qastra. 

*» 

xiv. 1. Next^ as to the Ajya (Qaatra). By the Ajya the gods conquered 
all desires, all immortality; verily thus also the sacrificer by the Ajya 
conquers all desires, all immortality. The Ajya is sixfold, the silent 
muttering, the silent praise, the Puroruc, the hymn, the strength of the 
hymn, and the offering verse. The year is sixfold in having six seasons ; 
by this sixfold Ajya the gods obtained the sixfold year with its six seasons, 
and by the year all desires, all immortality. Verily thus also the sacrificer by 
this sixfold Ajya obtains the sixfold year with its six seasons, by the year 
all desires, all immortality. In that he mutters in front the silent muttering, 
(it is because) the sacrifice is the world of heaven ; thus, in that he mutters 
the silent muttering in front, verily thus he produces a benediction, for the 
attainment of the world of heaven. Then he recites inaudibly the silent 
praise, to obtain all desires. ‘ Agni, light, light, Agni,' (he says) ; thus he 
obtains this world of worlds, the morning pressing of the sacrifice. ‘ Indra, 
light, light, Indra,* (he says) ; thus he obtains the world of the atmosphere 
of worlds, the midday pressing of the sacrifice. ‘Sun, light, light, sun,* 
(he says) ; thus he obtains yonder world of worlds, the third pressing 
of the sacrifice. He who yonder gives heat is the Nivid, for he keeps 
announcing all this. It is placed in front of the hymn at the morning 
pressing, for (the sun) then is in front ; in the middle of the hymn at the 
midday pressing, for it is then in the middle ; leaving over the last in the 
third pressing, for then it has gone round to the west. Thus he keeps 
placing^ the Nivid according to its appearance. They say ‘Coloured* 
(steeds) draw the morning pressing, white-backed the midday pressing, 
those with a white gloss the third pressing.* Because of the sun also he 
recites the Puroruc in twelve sentences ; the year has twelve months ; 
verily (it serves) to obtain the year. 

xiv. 2. Then he recites the seven- versed Ajya ^ ; the metres are seven ; 


1 For the Ajya 9astra see AB. ii. 81-41. For 
the ritual 95S. vii. 9. 

3 dadhad eti is certain, but beside the comm, 
is read only by M and W of Lindner’s 
MSS. The Anand. ed. has dadhateti, 

^ anjayah is rarely used as an epithet of colour 
by itself, but this seems the sense here. 


ziy. 2. ^ RV. iii. 13. The mode of recitation 
presumes that the second half-verse is to 
be pronounced samasta with the usual 
Pranava at the end, while there is a pause 
at the end of the first half- verse, which is 
recited as two Padas but without breath- 
ing in. Cf. AB. ii. 85. 



xiv. 2 — 3 The Soma Sacnjice [424 

verily (it serves) to obtain all the metres. It is in Anus^ubh verses ; the 
Anustubh is speech ; whatever is described by speech, the Anustubh, all that 
he obtains. He separates the two Padas ; that is a symbol of generation ; 
a man takes apart as it were (the limbs) of his wife. Further, in that he 
takes apart, that is a symbol of support. Now that between these two Padas 
is the face of death ; if a man say of one who breathes in at this place, ‘ He 
has entered the face of death, he will not live *, so would it be. Therefore 
without drawing in breath should he pass over; breath is immortality; 
thus by immortality he crosses death. He utters the Pranava at the end 
of the whole half -verse; verily thus he hurls a thunderbolt at his evil 
rival. They make up ten Gayatri verses, for the tenth Pada has eight 
syllables. The Anustubh is the Gayatri ; the metre of Agni is the Gayatri ; 
ten cups the Adhvaryu draws at the morning pressing; to nine (verses) 
they sing with the Bahispavamana (Stotra), the tenth is the call hiii ; these 
ten they taking separately make up the Viraj ; the Viraj is all proper food ; 
having procured that they deposit it in the sacrificer. Thrice (he recites) 
with the first, thrice with the last ; they make up eleven ; the twelfth is 
the offering verse; the year has twelve months; verily (they serve) to 
obtain the year. They, recited together, make up sixteen Gayatris ; thus 
the Ajya becomes converted into Gayatri verses. He utters as offering 
verse one to Agni and Indra ; verily thus he makes India a half-sharer in 
the pressing, * In the offering verse give the deities a portion,' Kausitaki 
used to say. The Viraj has thirty-three syllables; the gods are thirty- 
three ; he makes the gods sharers in the syllables. ‘ 0 Agni, with Indra, 
in the home of the generous one,' leaving over this Pada,* he breathes in at 
the half- verse of the Viraj ; the Viraj is prosperity and proper food; thus 
on the Viraj as prosperity and proper food he finds support. With the 
second half of the Viraj he utters the vasat call; verily thus in the world 
of heaven he places the sacrificer; he utters the second vasat, for the 
healing of the libations, for the support of the libations. 

xiv. 8. ‘ Let us two recite he calls out at the morning pressing ; in that 
they make the Pranava pure, it is a symbol of this world ; in that they 
make it end in m, it is one of yonder (world). In that they make the 
Pranava pure, (it is thinking) ' Turned away is yonder world ; let us not go 
turning away.' Moreover, this world is generation ; verily (it serves) for 
generation ; this world is a support ; verily (it serves) for support. ‘ Let us 
recite, O divine one,' the Adhvaryu (replies). These are eight syllables. 
‘The hymn hath been uttered,' the Hotr should say inaudibly at the 


» BV. iii. 25. 4. 

* For the Ah&vas and responses see AB. iii. 


12; Caland and Henry, L'Agnistomaf 



425] 


The Ajya Qastra [ — xlv. 4 

morning pressing ; ‘ Reciter of hymns *, the Adhvaryu (replies). These are 
eight. Having begun the pressing with the Gayatri they have found 
support in the Gayatri. 'O Adhvaryu, let us two recite,* he calls out at 
the midday pressing. ‘ Let us recite, O divine one,’ the Adhvaryu (replies). 
These are eleven syllables. ‘ The hymn hath been uttered to Indra the 
Hotr should say inaudibly at the midday pressing. * Reciter of hymns ’, 
the Adhvaryu (replies). These are eleven. Having begun the pressing 
with the Tristubh they have found support on the Tristubh. ‘ O Adhvaryu, 
let, let us two recite,’ he calls out towards (him) at the third pressing. ‘ Let, 
let us recite, O divine one,’ the Adhvaryu (replies). There are twelve 
syllables roughly ,2 thirteen. ‘ The hymn hath been uttered to Indra, to 
the gods,’ the Hotr should say inaudibly at the third pressing. ‘ Reciter of 
hymns ’, the Adhvaryu (replies). These are twelve exactly. Having begun 
the pressing with the Jagati they have found support on the Jagati. This 
is what is placed in the middle. If he uses here a transposed metre, still the 
metres are in order and carry the sacrifice of him who knows thus. ‘ More- 
over the following verse has been declared ’, he used to say, ' That the Gayatri 
is deposited on the Gayatri, or that they fashioned the Tristubh from the 
Tristubh, or that the Jagati Pada is placed on the Jagati, they who know 
this obtain immortality.’ In that these deities are fixed on these worlds, 
Agni as connected with the Gayatri here is fixed in this world of the 
Gayatri, Vayu as connected with the Tristubh is fixed in the world of the 
atmosphere connected with the Tristubh ; yonder sun as connected with the 
Jagati is fixed in yonder world connected with the Jagati, 


The PraUga Qastra. 


xiv. 4. Having recited the Ajya, he recites the Praiiga.^ The Ajya is the 
body of the sacrificer, the Praiiga the breaths ; in that having recited the 
Ajya he recites the Prauga, verily thus he places breaths in the sacrificer, 
to secure fullness of life in this world and immortality in yonder world. 
So the sacrificer lives a full life in this world, and obtains immortality and 
imperishableness in the world of heaven. When the Pavamana has been 
sung, he recites the Ajya. When the Ajya (Stotra) has been sung, (he 


3 M has lomagena; the sense is conjectural, 
but plausible. The number of syllables 
is thirteen instead of twelve, to corre- 
spond with the Jagati metre of the third 
pressing. The number 9 is only arrived at 
in avaclndr dyoktham devehhyah by leaving 
in operation the full Sandhi, contrary 
to the usage of the AB, Cf, Oldenberg, 
54 [h.o.s. ao] 


Prolegomenat pp. 878 seq. 

^ For the Prauga ^aatra see AB. iii. 1~4. This 
chapter deals with the seven Tricas of 
which it is composed (BV, i. 2. 1-3 ; 4-6 ; 
7-9 ; 3. 1-3 ; 4-6 ; 7-9 ; 10-12) and the 
relation to the Grahas. For the relation- 
ship of Ajya and Prauga see Weber, Jnd, 
Stud. X. 378, 374. 



xiv.4 — ] The Soma Sacrifice [426 

recites) the Prattga. The PraOga is the hymn of the Pavamana; the Ajya 
is the hymn of the Ajya. Thns he transposes the two ; it is as if one were 
to intertwine the outer reins of a chariot. ‘ Thus he accompanies the cups 
Eausitaki used to say; yonder cup for Vayu and Indra and Vayu (he 
accompanies) by that (recitation) for Vayu and for Indra and Vayu; that 
for Mitra and Varuna with that for Mitra and Varuna; that for the A5vins 
with that for the Alvins ; in that he utters the offering verses for the 
Prasthitas, that (he accompanies) with that for Indra ; in that the Hotrakas 
sacrifice together, that with that for the All-gods. Sarasvati is speech in 
all the pressings. He yonder who makes heat is the Puroruc, for he shines 
in front; again breath is the Puroruc, while the hymn is the body; the 
body is the Puroruc and the hymn is cattle and offspring; therefore he 
should not utter any call between the Puroruc and the hymn * Reciting the 
hymn with the Puroruc, he calls aloud for each Puroruc ; ‘ Vayu, proceeding 
in front ’ is the symbol of expiration ; ‘ O Vayu ' is the symbol of inspiration. 
He recites the Praflga as Gayatri ; thereby the morning pressing is obtained ; 
(he recites it) as addressed to Indra; thereby the midday pressing is 
obtained; (he recites it) as addressed to the All-gods; thereby the third 
pressing is obtained. 

xiv. 5 . Then * he recites a Puroruc addressed to the All-gods. It is of six 
feet ; the seasons some call it. The seasons are six ; he recites each two feet 
of it separately ; therefore the seasons are united in pairs and called ‘Summer, 
the rains, and winter.’ Some recite the Puroruc for Sarasvati ; he should 
not do so ; it is superfluous ; speech has of itself radiance ; speech is the 
Puroruc. ‘ O V ay u, come hither, O lovely one ’ and ‘ O A9vins, sacrificial food 
these two (hymns) are the Praiiga ; (they are) of nine verses and of twelve 
verses; these make twenty -one; the four (verse) Stoma, the highest of Stomas, 
is twenty-onefold ; thus he obtains the highest Stoma ; in that, further, 
there are twenty-one, and the months are twelve, the seasons five, these 
worlds three, and yonder sun the twenty-first, verily thereby he places the 
sacrificer in identity of world with (the sun). There are seven triplets ; 
the metres are seven ; verily (they serve) to obtain all the metres. More- 
over with these the gods appropriated the seven heptads of the Asuras ; 
verily thus also the sacrificer appropriates the seven heptads of the rival 
who hates him. In the beginning the morning pressing was Agni’s, the 
midday pressing Indra’s, the third pressing the All-gods’. Agni desired 
' Let me have a share in the midday pressing, also in the third pressing.’ 

* The hymn has at the beginning only a before the Puroruc. 

Puroruc and then the first verse ; after- ' For the ritual see ^9®* There a 

wards before each new triplet it has an Puroruc for Sarasvati, here forbidden, is 

Aiifiva,withthe response of the Adhvaryu, given without qualification. 



427] Preliminat'y Rites [ — xv. i 

Indra desired ‘ Let me have a share in the morning pressing, also in the 
third pressing.’ The AlLgods desired, ‘ Let us have a share in the midday 
pressing, also in the morning pressing.’ These deities thenceforward 
extended the morning pressing from the third pressing; in that they 
extended {ahhiprdyunjata), that is why the Praiiga has its name. There- 
fore many deities are praised at the Praiiga; therefore all the pressings 
have all the deities. Having recited the hymn ^ ‘ With all the sweet Soma 
drink he utters the offering verse for the All-gods, for the hymn is for the 
All-gods ; in Gayatri, the morning pressing is connected with the Gayatri. 
He should recite the second vasat.^ 


ADHYAYA XV 

The Soma Sacrifice {continued). 

Preliminary Rites. 

XV. 1. The ^ Gods having praised the pressing stones with the Arbuda 
(hymn *) and the verses for (Soma), the purifying, obtained immortality, 
obtained truth and resolve. Verily thus also the sacrificer in that he praises 
the pressing stones with the Arbuda (hymn) and the verses for (Soma), 
the purifying, obtains immortality, obtains truth and resolve. When the 
Pavamana has been sung, they proceed with the pot of milk, for this is the 
time for it ; moreover (it serves) to give the pressing sap. Then they proceed 
with the set of five oblations ; the explanation of this has been given. At 
the midday he utters a verse of Bharadvaja’s as the offering verse for the 
Prasthitas ; at the midday Bharadvaja gave Soma to Indra. It is a Tiistubh 
verse, addressed to Indra ; the midday pressing is connected with Indra and 
the Tristubh. He says the second meat, for the healing of the libations, 
for the support of the libations. Then the Hotrakas sacrifice together; 
the explanation of these (offerings) has been given ; then come the sacrificial 
food and the Hotr’s bowl ; the explanation of that has been given. When 
the Daksina offerings have been made, the fees are taken, for then the 
pressing stops. Moreover he ransoms himself in that the fees are taken : 
moreover with the fees he makes strong the sacrifice ; in that with the fees he 
makes strong {dakaayati) the sacrifice, therefore has the fee its name. The 
Sattra has the self as the Daksina ; therefore day by day should they mutter, 
‘ Here let me take myself as a fee for fair fame, for the world of heaven, 

» The subj. is strange and doubtful ; cf. p. 87. see Anartlya on ffS. vii. 16. 16. Cf 

1 For the ritual see 99®* 15-19. AB. vii. 1 and 2. 

* RV. X. 94. For the Pavamanls to be used 



XV. 1 ] The, Soma Sacrifice [428 

for immortality ’ ; verily thus they take themselves as a fee for fair fame, 
for the world of heaven, for immortality. Having recited (a verse 3) by 
Vi 9 vamitra as the invitatory (verse) of the cup for the Maruts, he uttera 
(a verse *) by Vi^vamitra as the offering verse ; the cup for the Maruts is 
the continuity of the pressing ; Vi^ivamitra is speech ; by speech the sacrifice 
is continued. These are two Tristubhs addressed to Indra ; the midday 
pressing is connected with Indra and the Tristubh. He says the second 
vaeat, for the healing of the libations, for the support of the libations. 


The MarutvcUlya (Rostra. 

XV. 2. Then* he recites the sixfold Marutvatlya; the year has six 
seasons ; verily (it serves) to obtain the year. He recites the six metresi 
Anu8tubh,Gayatri,Brhati,Usnih,Tri8tubh, and J agati. Therefore is it sixfold. 
With an Anustubh 2 , ‘ Thee like a car for aid’, he begins the Marutvatiya. 
The Marutvatiya is the hymn of the Pavamana ; the metre of Soma is the 
Anustubh. The explanation of the transposition of the Padas has been given. 
He recites Gayatri venses ; Gayatri verses are breath ; verily thus he places 
breath in himself. ‘ This drink, O bright one, is pressed ’ is the antistrophe *, 
containing the words ‘ pressed ’ and ‘ drink for it is the hymn of the 
Pavam&na. * O Indra, come nearer ’ is a Pragatha * inviting Indra. ‘ Nearer 
let us approach ’, the Maruts said to him encouraging him ; he said ‘ Having 
conquered and slain Vrtra, this is my Soma drinking along with you.’ 
This is his Soma drinking along with them. ‘ Forward now, Brahmanaspati ’ 
is (a Pragatha) addressed to Brahmanaspati ® and contains (the word) ‘ For- 
ward ’. ‘ Smite ’, Brahman said to him, encouraging him ; he said, ‘ Having 

conquered and slain Vrtra, this is my Soma drinking along with you.’ 
This is the Soma drinking of Brahman. ‘In it give the gods a share’, 
Kausitaki used to say. ‘ In which Indra, Vanina, Mitra, Aryaman, the gods, 
made their homes ’, in this ® are the gods given a share. They say ‘ In that 
in there is no strophe nor antistrophe, but an invitation to Indra and 
(a triplet) addressed to Brahmanaspati, then why are they recited repeating 
them and making them into Kakubh (verses) ? ’ The Saman singers sing with 
repetition in the PavamSna ; verily thus is a symbol of it produced. ‘ Agni, 
like Bhaga, is leader of the folk’ and ‘Thou with insight art keen of 

» EV. iii. 61. 7. xxv. 8). 

4 gv. iii. 47. 2. ’ ''^*'** cited six. 8 ; xx. 2 ; 

1 For the Marutvatiya ^astra of the midday xxiv. 2; xxv. 8). 

pressing, see AB. iii. 12-21. For the * RV. viii, 68. 6 and 6. 
ritual see vii. 9. 6-26. ‘ RV- •• ^ and 6. 

> RV. viii. 68. 1 (also cited xix. 8 ; xx. 2 ; * RV. i. 40. 6 c. 



429] The Marutvatiya Qastra [ — xv. 3 

insight, 0 Soma * are addressed to Agni and SomaJ Agni and 3^^®' were 
within Vrtra ; Indra was unable to hurl his bolt against them ; they went 
out for this share and for that which is theirs in the full moon sacrifice. 
The Marutvatiya is a hymn connected with the slaying of Vrtra ; by it 
Indra slew Vrtra. 

XV. 3. ^ The Maruts, rich in dew, swell the waters* is the water-swelling 
(verse) the water-swelling (verse) is the waters; in that over Vrtra 
slain the waters went apart, in that they swelled, thus it is (called) the 
water-swelling. It is a Jagati verse; through it all the pressings are 
Jagati. 'Thou hast been born, dread, for impetuous strength* is the 
Marutvatiya^ containing the word 'born*. Indra is born, in that he 
slew Vrtra; thus he who sacrifices is bom. At the first (verse) of it 
the Adhvaryu responds once with (a response) containing the form mad ; ^ 
here Indra for the first time was drunken (amadyat). The Marutvatiya is 
a hymn, winning battles; thereby Indra won battles. In the middle 
of it he places a Nivid ; in the middle of the body is food placed ; then 
he recites Nivids; the Nivids are the breaths; verily thus he places the 
breaths in himself. Each quarter verse of these he recites taking it 
separately ; verily thus each breath he places in himself ; with the last 
he utters the Pranava; thus he lets go this breath; therefore all the 
breaths breath along this breath. Now they say ‘ The Nivids are food * ; 
therefore should he recite them quietly, for not hastening as it were he 
eats unpleasant^ food. ‘Those who magnified thee, O bounteous one, 
at the slaying of the dragon *, having recited the hymn, (this verse ®) 
he utters as the offering verse. ‘ Who in the affair with Qambara, who in 
the fight for cattle, O lord of the bays *, (he says) ; ^ with them he per- 
formed these heroic deeds; with them is this his Soma drinking. The 
verse is a Tristubh addressed to Indra, for the midday pressing is connected 
with Indra and the Tristubh. He says the second vamt, for the healing 
of the libations, for the support of the libations. The first Anustubh is 
speech ; after it follow five Gayatris ; the invitation to Indra is the mind ® ; 
(the couplet) addressed to Brahmanaspati is the ear ; the three of common 
character® are expiration, inspiration, and cross-breathing; the hymn is 
the body; the Nivid what is within the body; the concluding verse a 
support ; the offering verse food. 


’ RV. Hi. 20. 4 ; i. 91. 2. 

1 RV. i. 64. 6. 

* RV. X. 7S (also cited in KB. xxi. 2 ; xxiv. 2 ; 

xxY. 3). ajdyata is not necessary. 

3 i. e. mod in i^onsamo daiva. See KB. xvi. 8, n. 5. 
^ PW. takes this as ' unpleasant and in KB. 


xiii. 8 vd pratikdminam shonld be read, and 
so in 99^* 6. 9 ; as annddya is 

normally neuter the form is a transfer to 
the a class, 
ff RV. iii. 47. 4. 

« The Bhftyyas, RV. iii. 20. 4 ; i. 91. 2 ; 64. 6. 



XV. 4 — ] 


The Soma Sacrifice 


[430 


The Nishevalya Qastra. 

XV, 4 (Next) ^ the Niskevalya. Both before and after are many gods 
mentioned in recitation ; but the Niskevalya is Indra’s only ; that is why 
the Niskevalya has its name. In that he begins with a Brhati, and he 
who gives heat here is connected with the Brhati, thus he makes him to 
prosper with his own symbol. He makes two into three by repetition ; 
that is the symbol of generation ; two as it were are there at first, then 
they are propagated. Having recited the strophe, he recites the anti- 
strophe ; the strophe is the self ; the antistrophe the ofispring ; therefore 
he should make the antistrophe to be corresponding in form ; a correspond- 
ing one is born in his offspring, not one who does not correspond. He recites 
a supplementary verse ; the supplementary verse is breath ; verily thus 
in himself he places breath. He recites a Pragatha; the Pragatha is 
cattle ; verily (it serves) to obtain cattle. Moreover the Brhati Pragatha 
is expiration and inspiration ; verily thus he places expiration and inspira- 
tion in himself. ‘I shall proclaim the manly deeds of Indra’ is the 
Niskevalya of fifteen verses;* the thunderbolt is fifteenfold ; verily thus 
with the thunderbolt he smites the evil of the sacrificer. In the middle 
of it he places a Nivid ; in the middle of the body is food placed ; then 
he recites Nivids ; the Nivids are the breaths ; verily thus he places the 
breaths in himself. Each quarter verse of these he recites, taking it 
separately; verily thus each breath he places in himself; with the last 
he utters the Pranava; thus he lets go this breath; therefore all the 
breaths breathe along this breath. Now they say ‘ The Nivids are food ’ ; 
therefore should he recite them quietly, for not hastening as it were he 
eats unpleasant food. He should recite the concluding verse in a lower tone ; 
so is his wife unlikely to fall away. (He should recite) in still lower a 
tone ; * so does his wife become as it were not uplifted in her mind. In 
that he gives a horse, and the horse is Indra, for the hymn is connected 
with Indra, verily thus he delights Indra. The strophe is the self ; the 
antistrophe offspring ; the supplementary verse the wife ; cattle the 
Pragatha ; the hymn the body ; the Nivid what is within the body ; the 
concluding verse a support ; the offering verse food. 

XV. 6. When^ the Pavamana was being sung, death clung to the 
Hotr; he removed it by the Ajya (^astra) except from the strophe; 

1 For the Niskevalya ^^stra see AB. iii. 22- ed. The sense must be as translated, 

24. For the ritual reading is uncertain. 

* RV. i. 32 (also cited in KB, xx. 4 ; xxiv, 2). xv, 5. ' Cf. AB. iii. 14, 

* anudayitataram is read in M and tho Anand. 



431] The Ni^kevalya Qastra [ — xvi. i 

when the Ajya ® Stotra (was being sung) it clung (to him) ; he removed it 
by the Prailga except from the strophe ; when the Madhyamdina Pavamana 
(was being sung) it clung to him ; he removed it by the Marutvatiya except 
from the strophe. In the Niskevalya he begins with the strophe ; that is 
as one in freedom from fear having removed death, like one having been 
set free.® They say, ‘There is a Niskevalya here, and a Niskevalya there 
in the Mahavrata. There are recited there (metres) increasing by four ; how 
here are they obtained ? ’ There are even more realized here ; the strophe 
and antistrophe, recited together, make up the seven increasing by four, 
and there is a four-syllable foot left over. They are cattle ; these cattle 
he confers upon the sacrificer. The Agnistoma is the Viraj ; they make 
up a hundred and ninety strophes ; he attains clearly the symbol of the 
Agnistoma in that he uses a Viraj as offering verse. ‘ Drink the Soma, 
O Indra, let it delight thee having left over this quarter verse he takes 
breath in at the half verse of the Viraj ; the Viraj is prosperity and proper 
food ; thus he finds support in the Viraj as prosperity and proper food. 
He says wasat with the second half verse of the Viraj ; verily thus he 
places the sacrificer in the world of heaven. He says the second vasat, 
for the healing of the libations, for the support of the libations. 


ADHYAYA XVI 

The Soma Sacbifice {continued). 

The Aditya Cup. 

xvi. 1. The^ morning pressing belongs to the Vasus, the midday pressing 
to the Rudras, the third pressing to the Adityas. In that he commences 
the third pressing with the Aditya cup, verily thus he begins with its 
own deity. Moreover this pressing has the sap extracted, in that it is 
the third pressing. The Aditya cup is full of sap; thereby verily he 
makes the third pressing possessed of sap. Having recited a Tristubh 
as the invitatory verse for the Aditya cup, he utters a Tristubh as the 
offering verse ; the Tristubh is might and strength ; verily thus he confers 
might and strength upon the sacrificer. He does not say the second 
vamt (thinking) ‘ The Aditya cup is the continuity of the pressing ; the 

^ sdmdjye looks like a gloss on but poss- ^ For the Aditya cup and the other offerings 
ibly the first djye is to be taken with here mentioned, see 99^* ^ ^ ! 

sirotriydt* The expression is awkward, Caland and Henry, V Agniftoma^ pp, 

® Possibly a gloss. 830-332. 



[432 


xvi. 1 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

second vasat call is the completion ; let me not before the time complete 
the pressing.’ The offering verse ^ contains (the words) ‘ be drunk for 
the third pressing is connected with ‘be drunk’. Then when the Pava- 
mana has been sung, they proceed with the victim, for this is the time 
for it; moreover (it serves) to confer sap on the pressing. Then they 
proceed with the ;five-oblation (sacrifice) ; the explanation of this has been 
given. He recites at the third pressing verses to Indra and the Rbhus ^ 
for the filling (of the bowls). When the Rbhus attained the love of 
Prajapati, then Indra gave them a share in the Soma drinking. Therefore 
they do not sing to verses to the Rbhus; but they call it the Arbhava 
Pavamana. At the third pressing he uses as offering verse for the 
Prasthitas (a verse) ^ addressed to Indra and the Rbhus ; verily thus he 
makes Indra a half-sharer in the pressing ; in Jagati metre, for the third 
pressing is connected with the Jagati ; containing (the words) ‘ be drunk 
for the third pressing is connected with ‘ be drunk *. He says the second 
vamt, for the healing of the libations, for the support of the libations. 
Then the Hotrakas sacrifice together ; the explanation of these (offerings) 
has been given. Then the sacrificial food, then the Hotrs bowl; the 
explanation of this has been given. At the third pressing they offer cakes 
for the fathers ; verily thus they delight the fathers. 

The Sdvitra Cup. 

xvi. 2. Then ^ they proceed with the cup for Savitr. At first they offered 
to him at the morning pressing; offspring were not born; then at the 
midday pressing ; they were not born even then ; then at the third 
pressing they offered io him ; then offspring were born. Therefore at 
the third pressing is Savitr fixed. Moreover Savitr is one of the Adityas ; 
the third pressing belongs to the Adityas ; therefore they offer to him 
at the third pressing. Having recited a Tristubh ^ as the invitatory verse 
for the cup for Savitr, he utters a Jagati® as the offering verse; the 
Tristubh is might and strength ; the Jagati is cattle ; verily thus at the 
end he finds support in might, in strength, and in cattle. He does not 
say for it the second vamt (thinking) ‘ The cup for Savitr is breath ; the 
second vasat call is the completion ; let me not before the time complete 
breath for breath here is yoked as it were. The offering verse contains 
(the words) ‘ be drunk *, for the third pressing is connected with ‘ be drunk 

* The verse is RV. vii. 51. 2. and Henry, VAgnistoma^ pp. 852, 853. 

3 RV. iv. 35. Cf. AB. iii. 29. 

< RV. iii. 60. 5. » RV. iv. 54. 1. 

1 For the ritual see 99®* viii. 3. 1-4 ; Caland ® Given in 99®* 3. 4. 



433 ] 


[ — ^xvl. 4 


The Vaigvadeva (pastra 

The VaiQvadeva Qastva. 

xvi. 3. He ^ begins the Vaifvadeva with Savitr ; on the instigation of 
Savitr the gods brought together the third pressing ; therefore the strophe 
and antistrophe and hymn^ are all Savitr 's. He begins the Vai9vadeva 
with an Anustubh, ‘That of Savitr we choose/ The Vai^vadova is the 
hymn of the Pavainana ; the metre of Soma is the Anustubh. The 
explanation of the division of the quarter verses has been given. He 
recites Gayatri verses ; Gayatri verses are breath ; verily thus he 
places breath in himself. He recites a hymn to Savitr, for a cup has 
been drawn for Savitr ; verily therewith he accompanies it. He recites 
(a verse) for Vayu ; ^ (the verse) for Vayu is breath ; verily thus he places 
breath in himself. In the recitation of this he releases (the cups) for 
two deities in Vayu, the breaths in the breath. He recites (the hymn ^) 
to sky and earth ; sky and earth are supports ; verily (it serves) for 
support. In this the Adhvaryu responds with (a formula containing 
the word^) macZ, for the third pressing is connected with ‘be drunk' 
{mad). He recites (the verse®) ‘Maker of fair forms'; that which has 
a fair form is food ; verily thus he places food in himself. Moreover 
this is the Soma drinking of the forms; verily thus he places form in 
himself. He recites (a hymn*^) to the Rbhus, for then Prajapati made 
preparation for them ; therefore (the hymn) to the Rbhus is recited here. 
Then he recites (verses)^ to Vena, to the Adityas, and to Brhaspati; with 
these he accompanies the Qukra and Manthin cups and the Agrayana 
cup; moreover this is the Vai9vadeva Qastra,® (so it serves) to secure that 
none of the deities are excluded. He recites the Vai9vadeva, for the 
Vai9vadeva cup has been drawn; verily therewith he accompanies it. 
The concluding verse he recites twice by quarter verses, the third time 
by half verses ; it makes up a Viraj ; the Viraj is prosperity and proper 
food ; (verily it serves) to obtain the Viraj as prosperity and proper food. 
Four hymns he recites in the Vai9vadeva; the Vai9vadeva is cattle; cattle 
are fourfold, and also four-footed ; verily (they serve) to obtain cattle. 
Therefore he should recite it abidingly ; with him cattle abide. 

xvi. 4. He recites the Vai9vadeva with sixteen calls ; ^ all this is of sixteen 


' For the Vai 9 vadeva ^a&tra see AB. iii. 25- 
32. For the ritual see 99®* S. 5-19, 
2 RV. V. 82. 1-3 ; 4-6 ; iv. 54. 

* Not in RV. Given in full at 99®* v^*^* 1^* 

« RV. i. 159. 

® i. e. ^onsdmo daiva, treated as fonsd modaiva, 

8 RV. i. 4. 1. 

55 [h.O.S, 2o] 


RV. i. 111. 

8 RV. X. 123. 1 ; 63. 8 ; iv. 50. 6. 

9 RV. i. 89. 

10 RV. i. 89. 10. 

xvi. 4. 1 That is, it occurs sixteen times ; see 
Galaiid and Henry, VAgnisiowiay p. 355. 
Of. Weber, Ind. Sfvd, ix. Ill, n. 1. 



[434 


xvi. 4 — ] The Soma Sacrijice 

parts; verily (it serves) to obtain all this. It is seventeenfold; eleven 
deities, four Nivids, the strength of the litany, and the offering verse; 
Prajapati is seventeenfold ; that rite is beneficial which is commensurate 
with Prajapati. Having recited the litany, he says an offering verse* 
for the All-gods, * 0 All -gods, hearken to this my call ’, for the litany 
is for the All-gods ; containing (the words) ' be drunk for the third 
pressing is connected with * be drunk " ; in Tristubh metre ; the Tristubh 
is might and strength ; verily thus he places might and strength in the 
sacrificer. He says the second vaaat, for the healing of the libations, for 
the support of the libations. The first Anustubh yonder is speech ; five 
Gayatri verses follow the Anustubh ; (the hymn) to Savitr is i^iind ; (the 
verse) to Vayu is breath; (the hymn) to earth and sky is the eyes; there 
is the breath here which is not distinct in (the verse), ‘ Maker of fair 
forms ’ ; (the hymn) to the Rbhus is the ear ; the three isolated verses 
are expiration, inspiration, and cross-breathing; the hymn is the body; 
the Nivid what is within the body; the concluding verse a support; 
the offering verse is food. They say ‘ Why are the holy power and the 
lordly power unstable, the subjects stable ‘ The morning pressing is 
the holy power, the midday pressing the lordly power, the third pressing 
is the subjects ; in that at the morning pressing and the midday pressing 
he concludes just as it may occur, therefore the Brahmans® rule the 
people insecurely, insecurely also the Ksatriyas; in that the concluding 
verse of the third pressing is stable, therefore are the subjects stable' 
(is the reply). 

xvi. 5. * Say ^ the offering verse for the ghee ' and ' Say the offering verse 
for the Soma drink he says ; by ghee and by Soma is the sacrifice carried 
on; these here he delights (thinking) ‘They delighted shall support the 
sacrifice.' Inaudibly he says the oficring verse for the ghee ; ghee is 
a pouring of seed ; inaudibly is seed poured. In that he says the offering 
verse aloud for the Soma drink, (it is because) Soma is the moon, and the 
moon is distinct. ‘ After it he should not perform any additional offering,' 
they say, ‘ So do they yonder from yonder look * back on this (world) '. 
But the rule is, ‘ Let him perform '. The butter is the world of the gods, 
the Soma the world of the fathers ; verily thus they arise from the world 

* RV. vi. 52. 13. caru. The answer here is in the affirma- 

^ brahmandh must be read. The Anand. ed. tive, but 99^* ^ treats it as optional. 

has brdhmanyaprajdh. Of. Caland and Henry, VAgnu^omaj pp. 

^ The question here discussed is whether a 362-4. 

third offering should be made to Visnu ^ parydvartanfiti in O marg. is a natural but 
after the two for Agni and Soma, the needless correction ; so the comm, in 

hist of butter, the latter of a saumya causative sense. 



436] The Vaigvadeva Qastra [ — xvi. 7 

of the fathers to the world of the gods ‘ Moreover thus they delight the 
fathers only in that they proceed with the Soma drink ; moreover thus the 
Upasads are left over/ they say. In the Upasads he sacrifices to Agni, 
Soma, and Visnu and to match this here also to Agni, Soma, and Visnu. 
They take the Soma drink to the Sadas ; the Hotr takes it and deposits it ; 
then he looks at himself in the melted butter in it and with two fingers 
touches the melted butter ; (with the words) ‘ Thou art the guardian of the 
guard mine eye,’ he should rub his eyes ; verily thus he guards his eyes. 
It he hands over to the Udgatrs. 

The Pdtnlvata Cup. 

xvi. 6. Then ^ they proceed with the Patnivata cup ; verily thus they 
make the wives of the gods sharers in the Ahavaniya. He does not say for it 
the second vasat, for it is mixed with butter, and butter has no share in the 
second vasat call. Inaudibly he says the ofiering verse ; the Patnivata cup 
is a pouring of seed ; inaudibly is seed poured. He does not say the second 
vasat (thinking) ‘ The Patnivata cup is a pouring of seed ; the second vasat 
is completion ; let me not before the due time complete the pouring of seed.* 
The offering verse ^ contains (the words) ‘ be drunk for the third pressing 
is connected with ‘ be drunk ’. They say ‘ Since this is the offering verse of 
the Nestr, then why does the Agnidhra say it as an ofiering verse ? ^ ‘ This 
ofiering verse is connected with Agni ; the Agnidhra is connected with Agni ; 
therefore the Agnidhra uses it as an offering verse ; moreover, thus the vasat 
calls of these unuttered become the same ’ (is the reply). 


The Agnimm^uta Qastra. 


xvi. 7. He ^ recites the Agnimaruta with twenty-one calls ; the four- verse 
Stoma, the highest of Stomas on which support is to be found, is twenty- 
onefold ; verily (it serves) for a support. The (Qastra) is twenty- fourfold ; 
there are twenty joinings ; these make forty- four ; the Tristubh has forty- 
four syllables ; the Tristubh is might and strength ; verily thus he places 
might and strength in the sacrificer. He recites (a hymn^) to Vaigvanara, 
for a cup for Vaifvanara has been drawn ; verily therewith he accompanies 


3 Perhaps this is the division of the sentence 
best to be adopted. Cf. below KB. xvi. 8. 

* The Patnivata cup is one for Agni with the 

wives of the gods {patnlvant) ; see 95*^* 
viii. 5 ; Caland and Henry, VAgnistoma, 
pp. 866, 867. 

* RV. iii. 6. 9. 


xvi. 7. 1 For the AgnirnSruta 9&stra see AB. 
iii. 83-88. For the ritual see 99®- viii, 
5 and 6. For the calls in this Qastra see 
the rules in 9?®* viii. 7 ; Caland and 
Henry, VAgnUUmaj p. 873. 

* RV. iii. 3. 



[436 


xvi. 7 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

it. He recites (a verse to Rudra ; Rudra is dread ; verily thus he makes 
medicine ; moveover his share is at the end ; therefore in the end (^astra he 
recites it. He recites (a hymn to the Maruts ; Rudra has them as his 
horde ; verily thus he makes him prosper with his own horde. Then come 
the strophe and antistrophe of the Yajuayajhiya ® ; these two he recites in 
the middle to frighten, for in the middle of the body is the womb placed to 
frighten. He recites (a hymn ®) to Jatavedas ; thereby is it called the 
Agnimaruta (Qastra). Therefore should he recite it quickly, just as one 
escaping a forest fire. He recites (verses'^) with the waters as deities; 
the waters are healing and medicine ; verily thus at the end in the sacrifice 
are healing and medicine produced. Therefore should he recite them 
slowly, just as one spraying himself in the waters. He recites ‘ the Dragon 
of the Deep ’ ® ; the dragon of the deep is Agni ; him with it he makes to 
glow ; moreover, with it he accompanies the altars. He recites ‘ the wives 
of the gods ’ ® and ' Raka ' ; verily with these he accompanies the Patnivata 

cup ; moreover, the wives have their portion at the end ; therefore in the 
end (^astra he recites these verses. 

xvi. 8. Ho recites the Aksarapahktis ^ ; the Aksarapahktis are cattle; 
verily (they serve) to obtain cattle ; moreover, the Aksarapanktis are expira- 
tion and inspiration ; thereby then he places expiration and inspiration in 
himself; moreover (they serve) to secure the presence of Indra in the 
Qastra. He recites (verses) to the fathers^ and to Yama^; verily thus 
he accompanies the Narafahsa cups; moreover the fathers have their 
portion at the end ; therefore he recites these (verses) in the end Qastra. 
He recites (the verses '‘) ‘ Sweet indeed is he ' ; verily with them he makes 
sweet the Soma for Indra; moreover, Indra is the world of the gods, Yama 
the world of the fathers ; verily thus he arises from the world of the fathers 
to the world of the gods. To them the Adhvaryu responds with (a formula 
containing the word) * mad\ for the third pressing is connected with 
‘be drunk’. He recites (a verse) to Visnu and Varuna^; the sacrifice is 


3 RV. ii. 33. 1. 

^ RV. i. 87. 

® RV. vi. 48. 1, 2; vii. 16. 11, 12 (made into 
three verses in each ca&e). The Anand. 
ed. has iti absurdly. 

* RV. i. 148. The variant ^moksyamnnah of M 
is an easy variation, but not necessary 
nor so probable as the text, which shows 
moksa as a desiderative basis without the 
sense of spiritual freedom. 

T RV. X. 9. 1-3. 

3 RV VI. 50. 14. Here, as in the next case, 
either the names are made up of tlie 


first words of the verses, or ^ans moans 
‘ celebrate’. The first is clearly the case 
in Ahir hudhnynm ^aiisali, 

» RV. V. 46. 7, 8. 

'0 RV. ii. 32. 4, 5. 

1 RV. vi. 44. 7-9. 

* RV. X. 15. 1-3. 

3 RV. X. 14. 4, 3 and 5. 

* RV. vi. 47, 1-3 For the last words of the 

sentence cf. above KB. xvi. 5. 

® Not in RV. AV. vii. 25. 1 has one version, 
A^JJS. V. 20 another. 



437' I'he Agnimuruta (^astra [ — xvi. 9 

connected with Vianu and Varuna; whatever mistake or error there is in 
the sacrifice, that with this he remedies; verily this is medicine. He recites 
fa verse) to Visnu ® and (a verse) to Agni ; of the gods Agni and Visnu are 
those whose portions are at the end ; therefore these he recites in the end 
Qastra. He concludes with (a verse) to Indra,^ for he is Indra's ; verily him 
Indra at the end establishes.^ 

xvi. 9. ‘ What is the deity of the Soma ? * ^ Madhuka asked Gau^ra. He, 
after running over (the words) ‘ Soma becometh pure replied ‘ There may be 
different ones.' ‘ As with the Bahvrcas ^ it should be connected with Indra ' 
was the rule of Paingya. ‘ It should be connected with Indra and Agni ' 
is Kausitaki's view. ‘ By Agni it begins in that (it begins) with the Ajya ; 
with Indra it ends (in) this concluding verse ; therefore it should be con- 
nected with Indra and Agni.* ‘This is the Agnistoma; this is taken for 
every desire. He who ofters with any other sacrifice without having 
sacrificed with this ^ prepares for himself a pitfall, he comes to ruin ^ he 
used to say. This Agnistoma begins with the Ajya (Qastra) and ends with 
the Agnimaruta. What has to be recited makes up three hundred and 
sixty Kc verses ; three hundred and sixty are the days of the year ; verily 
(it serves) to obtain the year.® After reciting the litany he uses as offering 
verse, ‘0 Agni, with the Maruts, resplendent, loud singing', addressed to 
Agni and the Maruts, for this litany is addressed to Agni and the Maruts ; 
in Jagatl metre, for the third pressing is connected with the Jagati; con- 
taining (the words) ‘ be drunk for the third pressing is connected with 
‘ be drunk '. He says the second vaisat^ for the healing of the libations, for 
the support of the libations. 

6 RV. i. 154. 1. 

^ RV. X. 53. 6. 

» RV. iv. 17. 20. 

® M alone has the necessary causative, the 
comm, and the other MSS. and the Anand. 
ed. having the simple. 

^ It is not clear to what this refers. Homah 
paiatfi is the Pratika of RV. ix. 96. 5, and 
if anything more than these two words 
are meant then the reference ought to be 
to a RV. text. On the other hand they 
are also the Pratika of VS. vii. 21, and 
the Vedic Concordance treats this verse as 
repeated in the Soma sacrifice at the 
Bahispavamana ; Caland and Henry 
(^L* Agnistoma^ p. 174), however, thinks 
that there also merely the words them- 


selves are meant, and this may be the 
case here also. The sense clearly is 
that Gau^ra treated the Soma as having, 
as deity, diverse gods. 

* Apparently the contrast is with a special 
school name Bahvrcas, as in the wider 
sense of that term it covers Paingya. 
Cf. the Bahvreabrahmana of Apastamba ; 
Keith, JRAS’. 1915, pp. 493-498. 

® The construction is rather ad senmm» 

^ K9S. X. 9. 25 ; PB. xvi. 1. 2 agrees with this. 

® For this phrase cf. KB. xxv. 14 : m may 
be alternative, or merely assertive. Cf. 
KB. xii. 4 ; xi. 4. 

® M has tat sariivafsarasyahany dpnoti, 

7 RV. V. 60. 8. 



xvi. 10 — 1 


[438 


The Soma Sacrijice 

The Sautrdmani. 

[xvi. 10. Having' sacrificed with Soma he should sacrifice with the 
Sautramani who desires prosperity, offspring, and the Viraj. The Sautra- 
manl is a sacrificial rite for Indra ; the third victim is the body of the 
sacrifice, two victims the arms ; therefore the arms are about the body ; 
therefore the two should be at each side about the body ; in that, after say- 
ing the second vamt over the cups of Sura and Soma, all * ; therefore having 
sacrificed with Soma let him perform the Sautramani; he who knowing 
thus, having sacrificed with Soma, sacrifices with the Sautramani, obtains 
prosperity, offspring, and the Viraj, and so he also who knows thus. The 
Viraj is prosperity and proper food; (verily it serves) to obtain the Viraj 
as prosperity and proper food. He goes to the final bath, as at the Soma 
sacrifice. Or he may if ho will offer a milk mess to Mitra and Varuna.] 


The Ukthya Sacrijice. 

xvi. 11. The' litanies of the Ukthya are addressed to Indra and Agni ; 
all the gods are Indra and Agni ; the third pressing is connected with the 
All-gods ; verily (they serve) to delight all the gods. In (verses) to Agni 
they give the lead for the Maitravaruna, in (verses) to Indra in the other 
two cases ; thereby these are addressed to Indra and Agni. They recite 
four hymns each ; the litanies are cattle ; cattle are fourfold ; moreover, 


* For the Sautramani see 59®* *'^* '3 (where 

the three victims for the A 9 vins, Saras- 
vatl and Indra are specified), cf. xv. 15 
(where the Sura is specified). The form 
here is that called elsewhere the Kaukili, 
an independent rite, while that con- 
nected with the Rajasuya is the Oaraka ; 
see Weber, Ind. Stud. x. 349-353 ; Eggeling, 
SBE. xliv. 213, 214 ; Hillebrandt, Ritual^ 
htteratur, p. 159. See also M 9 S. v. 2. 3 
and 11 ; B 9 S. xvii. 31-38. 

* These victims are offered (coram.); the 

text is corrupt. The bad text and the 
fact, not mentioned by Lindner, that M 
omits the whole section, taken in con> 
junction with the unnatural insertion of 
this paragraph at this juncture, and with 
the fact that the 99®* shows no know- 
ledge of this portion of the text, justify 
us in the belief that the chapter is an 
interpolation. Moreover, the term tnpa^u 


naturally denotes here the third victim, 
not a set of three victims, and in either 
case is an odd form without an early 
parallel ; the apparently similar tndiva 
hardly means simply the * third heaven * 
as taken by MW. ; it is rather a collec- 
tive formed in the normal way (Wacker- 
nagel, Aliind. Gramm. II. i. 304 seg.) from 
iri and dyu, meaning a collection of three 
heavens, and is due to the Vedic tripli- 
cation of the heaven, which again arose 
from the triplication of the universe (cf. 
Macdonell, Vedic Mythology ^ p. 9). BR.'s 
view that it refers to the inner space of 
the highest heaven is likewise im- 
plausible. 

xvi. 11. ^ For the three additional 9&)3tras of 
the Hotrakas after the Agnim^ruta 9Astra 
in the Ukthya rite, see AB. iii. 49, 60. 
The 9Astras are given in detail in 99 ®* 
ix. 1-4. 



439] 


Tlie Ukthya Sacrijice [ — xvii. 1 

cattle are four-footed ; verily (they serve) to obtain cattle. They make up 
twelve; the year has twelve months; verily (they serve) to obtain the 
year. The Qastras contain four calls; the litanies are cattle; cattle are 
fourfold; moreover cattle are four-footed; verily (they serve) to obtain 
cattle. The offering verses of the litanies are addressed to two deities ; 
the sacrificer has two feet ; (therefore they serve) for support. They 
make up four;^ the litanies are cattle; cattle are fourfold; moreover, 
cattle are four-footed ; verily (they serve) to obtain cattle. That of^ the 
Maitravaruna ® is addressed to Indra and Varuna, for his litany is ad- 
dressed to Indra and Varuna; that of the Brahmanacchahsin * to Indra 
and Brhaspati, for his litany is addressed to Indra and Brhaspati ; that of 
the Achavaka® to Indra and Visnu, for his litany is connected with Indra 
and Visnu. The first and last contain (the words) ‘be drunk’, for the 
third pressing is connected with ‘ be drunk ’. They make up three ; these 
worlds are three; verily thus they obtain these worlds. They are 
Tristubh verses; the Tristubh is might and strength; verily thus they 
place might and strength in the sacrificer. They say the second vasat^ for 
the healing of the libations, for the support of the libations. 


ADHYAYA XVII 

The Soma Sacrifice {continued). 

The Sodafin. 

xvii. 1. The^ Soda^in is a thunderbolt composed of the Anustubh; in 
that they undertake the Soda 9 in, they smite away the evil of the sacrificer 
with the thunderbolt composed of the Anustubh. It refers to the ‘bay 
steeds ’ ; the bay is breath, for it draws ; therefore it refers to the ‘ bay 
steeds’. The Soda 9 in is he yonder that gives heat; verily thus they 
delight him. There is a sixteenth Stotra, a sixteenth Qastra ; therefore 
is it called the Soda 9 in. In that they undertake the Soda 9 in, and all this 
(universe) is of sixteen parts, verily (it serves) to obtain all this. Moreover, 
the Soda 9 in is Indra ; therefore it refers to the ‘ bay steeds ', for Indra’s bay 
steeds are praised, ‘ 0 Indra rejoice, bring forward, come hither, O hero, 

2 i. e. deities, Indra, Varuna, Visnu, Brhas- ® RV. vi. 69. 3. 

pati. ^ For the §oda 9 in rite see AB. iv. 1-4. For 

® RV. vi. 68. 11. the ritual see 95®* ^ reads 

* RV. vii. 97. 10. anusiubho which is possibly correct. 



[440 


xvii. 1 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

of the bay steeds ’ these (verses) ® have twenty-five syllables and one by 
one have nine syllables added. The self is twenty-fivefold, what is added 
is offspring and cattle; verily thus he adds to himself in offspring, cattle, 
servants, and proper food. These make up thirty-four; whatever is of 
thirty-four syllables, that metre is the Svaraj ; verily thereby he obtains 
self rule. Repeated together they make up five Anustubh verses and 
a ten-syllable quarter verse is left over, two syllables for each verse. 
‘ Of such a one as thou, 0 thou of much light ’, this Gayatrl verse ® he 
recites next, for the completion of these syllables ; moreover along with 
it they make up a strophe of six Anustubh verses ; therefore he recites 
it, for completion. To match it some make an antistrophe ; but as to this 
they say* ‘The Soda^in is he yonder that gives heat; there is none 
other to be a counterpart of him ; if he were to make a counterpart and 
one were to say of him, “ The rival who is hateful will reject him ”, so would 
it be. Therefore he should not trouble about a counterpart.’ 

xvii. 2. Thereafter he transposes the metres which follow ; the metres 
are the breaths ; verily thus in the body he interweaves the breaths, to 
prevent separation ; therefore these breath.s, though breathing in different 
directions, do not blow out.* Moreover the Sodafin is connected with the 
Anustubh; verily thus he brings all the metres into relation with the 
Anustubh. He transposes Gayatri and Pankti verses ; ^ the Pankti is the 
metre of the sacrificer; the Gayatri is brilliance and .splendour; verily 
thus he places brilliance and splendour in the sacrificer. He transpases 
Usnih and Brhati venses ; * the Usnih is the metre of the sacrificer ; the 
Brhati is cattle; verily thus he confers cattle as connected with the 
Brhati upon the sacrificer. He transposes a verse of two Padas 
containing twenty syllables and a Tri.stubh;* the verse of two Padas 


* These verses are given in full in ix. 

5. 2; AV. ii. 6. 1 ; SV. ii. 802 -304 ; A^S. 
vi. 3. 1. hariha of 99®- 
absurd. A 9 S. has han iha as trisyllabic 
(no doubt) and this is presumably the 
source of AV.h.i\s haribhydm. The 
verses consist of 5 pentads and after each 
of the first three syllables are added 
(here pra vaha^ hariha). 

3 KV. viii. 46. 1. 

* The quotation is not finished by iti ; cf. 

KB. xii. 3, n. 2. 

' As in KB. vii. 9 all the MSS. save M and 
the Anand. ed. read vdTico ^nunirvdncy. 

* RV. i. 16. 1-3 and i. 84. 10-12. The viharana 

consists in placing a Pada of the Pankti 
after each of the Padas of the Gayatri and 


pausing after the first two, saying om 
after the second two, pausing after the 
third pair and saying om after the two 
remaining Padas of the Pankti, each by 
itself. 

3 RV. viii. 98. 1-3 and iii. 45. 1-3. The Padas 
are put together by two’s with alternate 
pause and om ; the two eight-syllable 
feet are made into one followed by a 
pause, then the two sets of four syllables 
over are united and combined with the 
last Brhati foot into a single verse 
followed by om, 

* RV. vii. 34. 4 and vi. 47. 8. The combina- 
tion is effected by dividing the Dvipada 
into four sets of five syllables. 



441] 


^odagin [ — xvih 4 

is the metre of the sacrificer; the Tristubh is might and strength; 
verily thus he confers might and strength upon the sacrificer. He 
transposes verses of two Padas containing sixteen syllables and Jagati 
verses;® verses of two Padas are the metre of the sacrificer; the 
Jagati is cattle; verily thus he confers cattle as connected with the 
Jagati on the sacrificer. He recites Gayatri verses; Gayatri verses are 
breath ; verily thus he places breath in himself. He recites a verse of 
seven Padas; the metres are seven; verily (it serves) to obtain all the 
metres; moreover, with it the Gayatri verses make up four Anustubh 
verses ; ® therefore he recites it, for completion. 

xvii. 3. Then he recites Anustubhs ^ of normal type ; the Soda 9 in is 
connected with the Anustubh; thus he causes it to prosper by its own 
symbol. They make up eight; by these (verses) the gods attained all 
attainments ; verily thus also with these the sacrificer attains alf attain- 
ments. With the last verse thrice repeated they make up ten; the Viraj 
consists of tens; the Viraj is prosperity and proper food; (they serve) to 
obtain the Viraj as prosperity and proper food. He concludes with 
‘ When up to the place of the bright one ' ; yonder is the place of the 
bright one where he yonder gives heat ; verily thus he places the sacrificer 
there. Three times ^ he utters the call for the Soda 9 in, in the strophe, for 
the Nivid, for the concluding verse ; the Soda 9 in is threefold ; verily thus 
with a threefold thunderbolt he smites the evil of the sacrificer. These 
are the fame, the sounds, the strengths of the litanies. Famous, re- 
sounding, strong, renowned does he become who knows thus the strengths 
of the litanies. They recited together make up forty Anustubhs; the 
Pankti has forty syllables; the Pankti is a support; verily thus in all 
creatures he establishes the sacrificer. 

xvii. 4. Some say * He should use an interpolated Tristubh as ofiering 
verse ‘For indeed the courser. — Thou hast drunk of the ancient 
draughts, O lord of the bays.— For the courser is a courser. — Now let this 
pressing be thine only. — The courser is a bearer. — Drink the Soma rich 
in honey, O Indra. — For the courser is active. — Do thou ever, O strong 
one, pour into thy belly.’ But the rule is not to interpolate. The offering 
verses are duly prepared dishes for the gods; verily thus with a duly 

® The Dvipadfis are given in 95S. ix. 6. 6 ; versei. These are nitya as offered to the 

and BY. x. 96. 1-3. The former are artificial Anustubhs above arrived at. 

divided into four sets of four syllables. The Nivid comes in before BY. viii. 69. 

6 BY. i. 84. 13-16 with BY. x. 183. 1 make up 15. 

Anustubhs by recital by two's and two's ‘ This is repeated in 9?^* 

with pause and om. variation in construction is noteworthy. 

1 95®* prescribes BY. viii. 69. xvii. 4. * BY. x. 96. 18. 95®* ^^* ignores 

1-3, 10, 13-15, and 17, all Anustubh the optioui for which cf. AB. iv. 4. 

56 [h. 0.8. Sft] 



[442 


xvii. 4—] The Soma Sacrifice 

prepared dish for the gods he tenders the oblation to the gods. He should 
not undertake it at night;* the Soda^in is Indra; there is nothing above 
Indra; much is aecompli&hed at night, the rounds as it were, and the 
Alvina* ((^astra); therefore he should undertake it on the fourth* day; 
that is the abode of the Soda 9 in ; that day concludes with the Soda 9 in 
as its end. But they say ‘ Let him undertake it ’ ; the Soda 9 in is the day 
and night complete ; in that they undertake the Soda 9 in it is to make day 
and night complete. 


The Atirdtra. 

xvii. 5. In * that they undertake the Atiratra, (it is because) the year is 
as great as day and night ; in that they undertake the Atiratra, (it serves) 
to obtain the year. Moreover, all this (universe) is twofold, unguent and 
brilliance; both of these are obtained by day and night. In that they 
undertake the Atiratra, (it is) for the obtaining of unguent and brilliance. 

xvii. 6. They recite strophes and antistrophes * in Gayatri ; the Gayatri 
is light ; night is the evil, the darkness ; thus thereby they smite away 
the evil, the dm’kneas. They recite with repetitions, for so do the Saman 
chanters sing; (they say) ‘According as it is sung, is it recited,’ Then 
they say ‘ Why after the final Pratihara do they call and link the ^astra 
with the Saman ? ’ 

xvii. 7. The sacrifice is a man; of him the oblation holders are the 
head, the Ahavaniya the face, the Sadas the stomach, the litanies the 
food, the Marjaliya and the Agnidhiiya the arms, the altars within the 
Sadas the internal divinities; the Garhapatya and (the fire) for cooking 
the fast milk the support. Again, of him the Brahman priest is the mind, 
the Udgatr the expiration, the Prastotr the inspiration, the Pratihartr 
the cross-breathing, the Hotr the speech, the Adhvaryu the eye, the Sadasya 


® The argument is clearly one as to the place of 
the Soda9in if used in connexion with an 
Atiratra as it is assumed to be used in 
this school. Is it to be said at night 
after the threefold carousal of the 
Atir&tra begins, or is it to be said on the 
morning of the day after the carousal ? 
The answer first suggested is the latter 
view, bahurdtrydm may be a cpd. as taken 
by the edd., but this is unnecessary. 

Cited in Nirukia i. 9 as equivalent to dfvinath 
ca parydydg ca, where the reading as in M 
has only one tvad. But this is very strange, 
tvad ata or tvat tata may be read. The 
A9vina fastra is to be recited up to sun- 


rise ; see 99^* 

** i. e. the Soda9in is the suitable rite for the 
foui’th day in a continuous offering ; see 
99s. X. 2. 11. 

* For the Atiratra see AB. iv. 6 and 6. For 
the ritual see 99®* 7-19 for the 9astras 

of the priests at the three Paryayas. 

xvii. 6. ^ The explanation follows in KB. xvii. 
7. The point is not that the correspond- 
ence of 9^stra and Stotra is modified by 
the 9a8tra beginning after the Pratihara 
of the Saman and not after the Nidhana, 
but merely, it seems, to explain the 
parallelism. 



The Atiratra 


443] 


[ — xvii. 9 


generation,^ the sacrificer the body, the Hotra^ahsins the limbs. In that 
the Adhvaryu starts the Stotra, verily thus he unites the eye with the 
breaths; moreover, verily thus he connects inspiration with the mind. 
In that the Prastotr addresses the Brahman with ‘ O Brahman, shall we 
begin the praise, O Pra 9 astr ? ’ (it is because they think), ‘ Mind is the 
leader of these breaths ; impelled by mind let us sing the Stoma * ; more- 
over, verily thus he connects inspiration w^ith the mind. In that the 
Brahman approves the Stotra, verily thus he unites the mind with the 
breaths; moreover, verily thus he connects inspiration with the mind. 
In that the Prastotr begins the praise, verily thus he places inspiration 
in expiration. In that the Udgatr sings, verily thus he places expiration 
in cross-breathing. In that the Pratihartr utters his part, verily thus he 
places cross-breathing in expiration. So all these deities find support in 
expiration. In that the Hotr connects the Qastra with the Saman, and 
the Hotr is speech, verily thus he unites speech with the breaths ; more- 
over, verily thus he connects inspiration with mind. In that the Hotra- 
5 ansins make a continuity with the Saman, verily thus they connect the 
limbs with the breaths. In that the sacrificer sings in accompaniment 
to the Stotra, and the singers arc the breaths, verily thus he places 
the breaths in himself. Therefore the sun should not set on him outside 
the altar place, ^ nor should it rise on him, nor should he make preparations, 
nor utter the invitation, nor say the vasat, nor should (the sun) heat (him) 
when in what is not an altar, ^ (thinking) ‘ Let me not sever the body from 
the breaths.’ 

xvii. 8. In that in the first rounds they repeat ^ in the first Padas, verily 
thus from the first night they smite away the Asuras ; in that in the 
middle rounds they repeat in the middle Padas, verily thus from the 
middle night they smite away the Asuras; in that in the last rounds 
they repeat in the last Padas, verily thus from the last night they smite 
away the Asuras. Just as one can by separate repetition ^ and by 
repeating severally smite away evil again and again, so with these strophes 
and antistrophes from day and night they smite away the Asuras. 

xvii. 9. They recite the beginnings of the litanies in Gayatri verses ; the 
Gayatri is brilliance and splendour; verily thereby they place brilliance 


' The Anand. ed. has prajdpatih for prajdiih^ 
but merely, it is clear, by an error, 

® The whole emphasis is placed on hahirvedi, 

® Cf. Vait, xii. 8 where pratapet is normal as 
against pra^ope^a ; perhaps heating imple- 
ments is meant. 

xvii. 8. ^ The reference is to the repetition 
of the first Padas in the Stotras and the 
^astras. The use of ninariayanti in this 


sense points to the union of song and 
recitation and dancing. 

* dbhydgaram is doubtful : BR. gave it as 
‘ besprechen', B. as Mn the house » ; this 
is possible, but MW.’s rendering is 
followed : if abhydgaram is taken as by B. 
then there may be a reference to a magic 
dance as a popular rite. 



[444 


xvii. 9 — ] The Soma Sacrijice 

and splendour in the sacrificer. Having recited Gayatri verses, they recite 
Jagati verses ; between the Gayatri and Jagati verses they insert the calls ; 
verily thus they make the metres of varied strength. Having recited 
Jagati verses, they conclude with Tristubh verses. The Tristubh is might 
and strength, the Jagati cattle ; verily thus in might and strength at the 
end and in catt\e they find support. The offering verses ^ are in Tristubh, 
and contain (the words) ‘ Soma juice *, ‘ be drunk and ‘ drink ’ as their 
characteristics and are perfect ; that is the symbol of night. They should 
keep awake through the night ; keeping awake is the light ; the night is 
the dark, the evil ; thereby by the light they cross the dark, the evil. So 
long as there is no singing or reciting, so long are the Raksases able to 
drink after;* therefore ‘Do ye lighten up the kindled Ahavaniya, the 
Agnidhriya, the Garhapatya and the altars * they should say aloud ; they 
should lighten up, it should be light as it were, they should lie snoring ; 
them the evil does not attack (perceiving) ‘ They are in motion ’ ; ^ they 
smite away the evil. 

ADHYAYA XVIII 
The Soma Sacrifice {continued). 

The Agvina Qastra. 

xviii. 1. The ^ Alvina (Qastra) is (a sacrifice) wherein there is a redund- 
ancy of Soma ; wherein in the sacrifice there is a redundancy, thereby the 
rival of the sacrificer is energetic against him. In that afterwards he sacri- 
fices to the Alvins, and the A 9 vins are the physicians of the gods, verily thus 
he makes medicine. Now when Savitr gave Surya to Soma, the king, he 
made over to his daughter whether she was Prajapati’s * (or his own) on 

^ These are for him and twelve offering has correctly ujijvdlayateti bkateran for 

verses ; it is clear that andhas is by the Lindner's ujjvalayate 'tibhdferan, samind- 

Brahmana connected with * darkness *. hvam is possible, not necessary. 

The Yftjyas are for the first night RV. ii. xviii. 1. ^ For the A 9 vina s®® AB. 

14, 1 ; vi. 44. 16 ; vi. 24. 1 ; vi. 44. 16 ; iv. 7-11. For the ritual see 95S, ix. 20. 

for the second night, ii. 19. 1 ; vi. 44. 14 ; ‘ This seems the reasonable sense of the 

X. 112. 2 ; X. 112. 6 ; for the third night, interpolation of these words. Prajftpati 

iii. 86. 1 ; ii. 16. 1 ; vi. 87. 2 ; x. 104. 8. figures as the giver and Savitr as the 

* See above KB. x. 2. father of the girl in AB. iv. 7, and Prajd- 

3 H has clearly tan vi tat ceitanti nvai (misread patis is, of course, an easy correction ; 

by Lindner), K. has the same without vi, the genitive cannot well be meant as^a 

and BL. nearly the same. The reading dative {Nir. xii. 8), as this is contrary to 

must certainly be cestanii. The Anand. the usual version. The Anand. ed. has 

ed. has fam ccftim tanvd. It, however, purastdi, erroneously. 



446] 


The Agvina Qastra [ — xviii. 3 

marriage this thousand (of verses) that was in the possession of these 
deities; they said 'Let us run a race for this thousand’; they ran the 
race ; then the Afvins were victorious by means of the ass. Therefore are 
many gods celebrated, and yet it is called the Alvina. Hence, moreover, 
the ass does not run with his full speed, considering himself worn out 
(because) ‘ I have done my running.’ ® A thousand should he recite, for 
a thousand they too won. 

xviii. 2. They say ‘ Seeing that the Prsthas depend on the Brhati, then 
why does he begin with a Tristubh?’ Thrice repeated it makes three 
Brhati verses and one Gayatri. The three Brhati verses are the symbol of 
union, the Gayatri the symbol of the first. In that he produces the Brhati, 
(it is because) it is with regard to the Brhati that the vow is produced,^ 
In that of the strophes in Brhati he recites the first Pragatha, repeating it 
and making it into Kakubh form, (it is because) the Saman chanters sing 
with repetitions ; verily thus the symbol of this is produced. He recites 
the service for Agni ; thus he obtains this world. He recites that for Usas ; 
thus he obtains the world of the atmosphere. He recites that for the 
Alvins ; thus he obtains yonder world. He recites the service for Surya ; 
there is a fourth world of the gods, the waters ; verily thereby he obtains 
it. He recites a Pragatha; the Pragatha is cattle; verily (it serves) to 
obtain cattle. Moreover the Pragatha in Brhati is expiration and inspira- 
tion ; verily thus he places expiration and inspiration in himself ; also 
(it serves) to secure the presence of Indra in the Qastra. He recites 
(a hymn) to sky and earth ; sky and earth are supports ; verily (it serves) 
for support. He recites (a verse) of two Padas ; (the verse) of two Padas 
is a metre in which to find support ; verily (it serves) for support. He 
concludes with (a verse) to Brhaspati ; Brhaspati is the holy power ; verily 
thus in the holy power at the end he finds support. Now this is the 
completion. 

xviii. 3. Three ^ hundred Gayatri verses are two hundred Brhati verses ; 

* This seems the sense of M's reading srtam ; Agastya (i. 180, 181, 183, 184) stand, but 

the other MSS. and the comm, have after i. 116 is placed i. 120. 1-9; after 

fntom, while the Anand. ed. has ^itam i. 184 come 103 verses of the Supar^ or 

nayetu in place another 103 to the A 9 vlns (given 

1 The Anand. ed. has hrhcut and sampadyanie byAnartfya); thenin the Prataranuvaka, 

absurdly. RV. x. 1 60. 1-8 is omitted ; all of i. 47. 

xviii. 3. ' The A 9 vina 9astra according to 1-8 is said (not only 1, 8, 5) ; 11 verses 

f&hkh. is composed as follows, as a vikrti of the Usnih section disappear and 11 of 

of the Prataranuvftka : it commences with the Agni section in Jagatl ; sunrise is to 

RV. vi. 15.l8-15(toAgni)inplaceof x. 80. take place at the last Pahkti Pada, and 

12 ; oftheG&yatrl verses 19 are omitted, of then the SOrya hymns begin, viz, i. 60. 

the Anustubh two, of the Tristubhs 113 ; 1-9; i. 116; x. 87; the Prag&tha, vii. 

the hymns by Kaksivant (1,116-118) and 82, 26, 27; i. 22. 13-15; a Dvipada 



[446 


xviii. 3 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

seventy Anustubh and seventy Pankti verses are one hundred and forty 
Brhati verses ; deducting a hundred Gayatri from three hundred Trist.ubh 
verses there are three hundred Brhati verses ; the hundred Gayatri verses 
and a hundred Jagati verses are two hundred Brhati verses ; fifty Tristubh 
and fifty Usnih verses make up a hundred Brhati verses; then there are 
fifty-seven Brhati verses actually found; the fifty-first and fifty -second 
Tristubh verses and (the verse) of two Padas are three Brhati verses ; thus a 
thousand Brhatis are made up from a thousand of varied metres. ‘He should 
not recite over a thousand, nor less than a thousand ’ is the rule ; ^ the expan- 
sion of the Alvina is however conspicuous. This is a service for Agni ; verily 
he should not fall away from the service for Agni ; if he should pass over the 
service for Agni before the due time, he should apply there whatever iu 
the A9vina is addressed to two gods in the Res ; in the service for Surya 
(he should use) (the verses) for Soma, the purifying, according to metre, 
Gayatri in Gayatri, Tristubh in Tristubh, Jagati in Jagati; all that is 
connected with Siirya * in the place of (the service) for Surya ; all Pragathas 
to Indra in the place of the Pragatha ; all to sky and earth in the place of 
(the hymn) to sky and earth ; all (verses) of two Padas in the place of (the 
verse) of two Padas ; all addressed to Brhaspati before the final verse. That 
is whatever of the Res is not set forth,^ 

xviii. 4. The Alvina is like (a wagon) with wheels ; the two Alambanas ^ 
are the wheels, the aimless verses the axle, (the verse ®) ‘ Hither your chariot, 
O A9vins, with the speed of the falcon ’ the seat ; the four Agastya hymns 
the yokes. This is the chariot of the gods. With this chariot of the gods 
ho attains in safety the world of heaven. (The Qastra) should include the 
Suparna ; the Suparna is a bird ; like it becoming a winged one, a bird, so 
he attains in safety the world of heaven. Twice ho utters the call for the 
A9vina, for the introduction and for the concluding verse ; that is as when 
one, not being covered, makes a covering by an obstruction.® Now comes 
the question of the conclusion. Whenever the sun creeps over on to the 
front (of the oblation holder), whenever the Hotr himself can discern it. 


(12-1-8); as finale ii. 23. 16 (to Brhas- 
pati). The invitatory verse is given in 
ggS. ix. 20. 31. 

9 It is clear that the text encourages the use 
of extra verses which it goes on to 
enumerate. The last verse being ad- 
dressed to Brhaspati explains the nature 
of the insertion allowed before it. The 
comm, takes pro as a parmnata, and etad 
vai as svamafa. 

3 sihyanyaTigam of M is clearly to be read, 


against sauryam nyaJigam of the edd. 

* The sense of this clause is doubtful ; yai 
seems needed before kimeit, 

^ The sense of dlambam is clearly some part of 
the A 9 vina 9^stra, viz. the two support- 
ing parts. For akudhryanc see KB. viii. 
6, n. 6, 

2 RV. i. 118. 1. For Suparna cf. Oldenberg, 
GGA. 1907, p. 229, n. 6 ; AB. viii. 10. n. 6. 

^ The constr. is curious in the absence of an 
expressed object. 



447] The Agmna Qastra [ — xviii, 6 

whenever its ruddiness comes on,* whenever all its rays move out towards 
him, that is the time for the conclusion ; for at this time he is freed from 
evil, severed from evil. He smites away evil, he is severed from evil, who 
concludes at this time. If there is rain, that is the form of him by which 
he supports offspring ; this breath in the self is one with it ; ‘It is not 
concealed from me *, 

xviii. 5. so regarding it, he should conclude. He should offer a libation 
to the shining one, when the sun cannot be discerned, he who is unsuited ^ ; 
he becomes then revealed to them. With two (verses) should he sacrifice, 
for by reason of two it is called the A9vina. Having recited the Gayatri 
without breathing in, he takes in breath at the half verse of the Viraj ; 
the Viraj is prosperity and proper food ; verily thus he finds support in 
the Viraj as prosperity and proper food. With the second half verse of 
the Viraj he says the vasat call; verily thus he places the sacrificer in 
the world of heaven. ‘He should use the Viraj only as offering verse’, 
Kausitaki used to say; the Viraj has thirty-three syllables; the gods 
are thirty-three; the gods he makes to share the syllables. ‘O Alvins, 
ye of keen insight, with Vayu’, is, however, ^ the rule, namely a Tristubh 
to the Afvins, containing (the words) ‘Kept over night’, for the Somas 
are kept over night. Moreover, the Tristubh is might and strength: 
verily thus he places might and strength in the sacrificer. He says the 
second vasat^ for the healing of the libations, for the support of the 
libations. When the Saman chanters have finished, he offers the two 
libations of the offering for the choosing (of priests) (thinking) ‘Speech 
and mind being delighted shall support^ the great Qastra.’ 


The Hdriyojana. 


xviii. 6. They ^ proceed with the offering to the yoker of bays ; verily 
thus they delight the two bays ; therein the gods with their horses are 
delighted. Having recited a Tristubh as invitatory verse, he uses a 
Jagati as offering verse ; the Tristubh is might and strength ; the Jagati 


is cattle ; verily thus in might and 

* dplijdt is odd and apiydt (comm.) seems 
natural. 

® The identity of the breath and the sun is 
clearly indicated. The Anand. ed. has 
atilohito mad which is clearly an error due 
to lohitam above. It has also yad abhram, 
and, with M, pratyutperan, M runs on the 
sentence, as is essential. 

' anupayuktah can hardly apply to the sun, 
but is rather used to denote one whom 


strength at the end and in cattle he 

the sun does not oblige by his presence. 

^ Kausltaki*s rule is here disregarded in 
favour of a different rule. 55®* ^^* 2^* 
gives the rule as a compound of RV. i. 46. 
16 and vii. 68. 2. The rule hero is to use 
RV. iii. 68. 7. 

5 The Anand. ed. has the form udyatsclte j 
cf. VOJ. xxiii. 70. M has vdyacchdtam iti. 
xviii. 6. ‘ For the Hfiriyojana see 55®* 

The verses are RV. iii. 63. 2 ; i. 82. 6. 



xviii. 6 — ] The Soma Sacrifice [448 

finds support. The offering verse contains (the words) ‘ be drunk ^ for the 
third pressing is connected with ‘be drunk’. He says the second vasat 
for the healing of the libations, for the support of the libations. He 
should take the most of the grains ; the grains are cattle ; verily thus he 
confers a multitude of cattle upon himself. In that they mutter the 
Rc, in that they offer the libation, verily thus they produce a benediction, 
for the healing of the sacrifice, and for the curing of the sacrificer. 
They cast them down on the ash border of the Ahavaniya ; the Ahava- 
niya is the birthplace ^ of cattle ; verily thus he places them in a secure 
fold. 

The (^dkalas. 

xviii. 7. Then^ they offer the (^akalas. Just as a snake is rid of its 
old skin, or the stem from reed grass, so are they set free from all evil. 

The Conclusion of the Jyotistoma. 

xviii, 8. Then^ turning to the left, they approach the Somas in the 
waters ; they place them here within the altar, for that is the abode of 
the Soma; they distribute the branches of Darbha grass; when the 
waters and the plants come together, then the Soma is complete. With 
a verse to Visnu ^ they pour them down ; Visnu is the sacrifice ; verily 
thus they establish them at the end in the sacrifice. Then they stroke 
the vital organs; verily thus they make whole whatever here has been 
ill-treated or injured of the vital organs, they cure it. They make en- 
closures for the food ; verily thus the food of the gods they sever from the 
food of man. 


The Final Bath. 

xviii. 9. The^ final bath (is described). Him who yonder gives heat 
they seek by these pressings to obtain ; the rising by the morning pressing, 
(the sun) in the middle (of his course) by the midday pressing, (the sun) 
as he sets by the third pressing. He, having entered the waters, becomes 
Varuna; therefore he offers to Varuna a cake on one potsherd ; prosperity 
is solitary ; Varuna is prosperity ; verily thus he finds support at the end 
in prosperity. They depart between the pit and the mound, for that is 

^ jyotih is clearly a very inferior reading: it xviii. 8. ^ This chapter continues the Jyoti- 

is accepted by the Anand. ed. stoma ; see ffS. viii. 9. 2-9, 

* For these offerings see 95®* ^^“* ^ > * ®^* ^^^* ^* 

Oaland and Henry, VAgnisUma^ p. 388. xviii. 9. ^ FortheAvabhrthasee99®* viii.lO; 

Caland and Henry, VAgnistoma^^^.Z^Zseq, 



449] 


The Final Bath 


[ — xviii. 11 

the proper path of the sacrifice, named Apnana. That is declared in 
a Rc,* ‘Who here hath proclaimed the Apnana passage?’ Having ap- 
proached the sacrifice by this passage, they obtained all desires. Verily 
thus also the sacrificer by this passage having approached the sacrifice 
obtains all desires. 

xviii. 10. Turning ^ to the region in which are the waters, they proceed 
(with the rite) ; it is the eastern quarter in which the deities are. He 
offers four fore-offerings, omitting that for the strew that for the 
strew he omits, for the strew is not strewn here. The butter portions 
contain a reference to the slaying of Vrtra, for the slaying of evil ; 
moreover, thus he does not depart from the model of the full moon 
sacrifice. Some make them contain (the words) ® ‘ in the waters *, but 
the rule is that they should refer to the slaying of Vrtra. In that he 
sacrifices to Varuna in the waters, verily thus he delights him in his own 
abode. In that he sacrifices to Agni and Varuna, therein Agni becomes 
a sharer in all the oblations. He offers two after-offerings, omitting that 
for the strew; he leaves out that for the strew, (thinking) ‘The strew 
is offspring; let me not cast oflTspring into the waters.’ There are a 
hundred and one fore-offerings and after-offerings ; man has a hundred 
(years of) life, has a hundred joints, has a hundred strengths, has a 
hundred powers ; the hundred and first is the body. This is the way of 
the Aiigirases; he sets out by this way, he obtains identity of world 
and union with the Angirases.^ The six or eight vasat calls are the way 
of the Adityas ; he sets out by this way, he obtains identity of world and 
union with the Adityas. 

The Anuhandhyd. 

xviii. 11. The Anubandhya^ (is explained). The offering of the cow is 
the fourth pressing ; therefore is it immovable, for it is the fourth of the 
pressings. It is offered to Mitra and Varuna, for (the victim) for Agni 
and Soma has been offered before; therefore is it for Mitra and Varuna, 
to secure the equipoise of the sacrifice. Moreover, in that he sacrifices 
to Varuna in the waters, therein is Mitra neglected;^ therefore is it for 
Mitra and Varuna, to secure Mitra also. 

2 RV. X. 114. 7 c. 4 See 4 . 5. 19, 20 ; K^S. x. 8. 30 ; for 

1 See for the offering to Varuna and the other the Adityas see 9®* iv. 4. 5. 18, 19, 

rites 95®' viii. 11. which allows only six offerings in all : 

2 rtebarkiskan and rtebarhiskau must, of course, cf. Weber, Ind. Stud. x. 398. 

be read; so xviii. 12araA:foAa<am; xix. 6tre- xviii. 11. ^ For the Anubandhyft offering see 
dhavihito ; xv. 1 ; xvi. 1 ; xxix. 2 ; and xxx. 1 55S. viii, 12. 6-14 ; Caland and Henry, 

atrahdlo (Caland, VOJ. xxiii. 63) is certain. VAgnistwna, pp. 406-8. 

* RV. viii. 43. 9 and i. 23. 20. * hi no is absurdly read in the Anand. ed. 

57 [h.OS. 26] 



[450 


xviii. 12 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

xviii, 12. If the victim has been brought up but before being prepared 
for sacrifice dies, he should cause it to be given to the priests j then they 
should ofier another, of the same form and of the same deity.^ When the 
Apris have been said over it and the fire carried round it, they should lead 
it northwards and should dispose of it. In the manner of it they should 
take another. Having forced out their omenta separately and cooked them 
separately, they should offer them, cutting off portions separately, with 
one vasat call. Having cooked separately the cakes for the victims, and 
having made portions separately, they should offer them with one vaaat 
call. Having cooked separately the oblations and having made portions 
separately, they should offer them with one vu^t call. So with the 
thirds of the intestines, so with the hind portions. ‘ Even if, however, 
but one of the Apris has been said, with it should they proceed ’ is the 
rule.® The Apris are the breaths; verily thus he places the breaths in 
it. Now (they ask) ‘ If (the victim) is eight-footed, how shall it be ? ’ 
Having cooked on the slaughtering fire from the skin of the embryo 
(a portion) shaped like the omentum and from chaff of the pounded grains 
an embryo itself, they should offer on the slaughterer’s fire to the wsa# 
of the other.® The Raksases go to the sacrifice when such a thing 
occurs ; them thereby he smites away ; that is not smitten by Raksases. 
So now if that which is to be offered is an animal, but if it is a milk 
mess (it is because) the milk mess is Mitra and Varuna’s own oblation, 
for it is the rule that to Mitra and Varuna the milk mess is ofi’ered. 

xviii. 13. If the victim is a cow, (it is because) Mitra and Varuna are 
praised with the cow ; therefore the victim is a cow. The offering verse ^ 
for the omentum is ‘ Ye two are clothed in garments of fatness ’ ; ‘ fatness ’ 
is the symbol of the fat of the omentum. That® of the cake is ‘What 
is most abundant, not to be pierced, O ye rich in dew ’ ; ‘ most abundant ’, 
(he says), for the cake is abundant as it were. ‘ Do ye stretch forth your 
arms for life for us’ is that® of the oblation; ‘arms’ is tjhe symbol of the 
members of the oblation. 

xviii. 14. He * concludes facing north, for north is the world of the living. 
Having concluded facing north, he offers a full libation with a verse to 
Visnu; Visnu is the sacrifice; verily thus he grasps the sacrifice. The 

I See 99 s, xiii. 2. 1. phatikaranat (not recorded by Lindner), I 

* I. e. go on with the offering ; see 95®* have translated it, the other reading 

8, 1. being very probably a gloss interpolated 

9 See 95 ®* which verbally quotes. in the text. Cf. Atharvaprdya^citte, ii. 6, 

The phrase phoUlkarandmm phdlikarandn xviii. 13. ' RV. i.l52. 1. 

* scrapings of polished rice grains ' ® RV. v. 62. 2. 

(comm.) is curious, and probably corrupt : * RV. vii. 62. 6. 

as M reads ihe much more simple xviii. 14. ^ JFor the ritual see 95®* ^^* 



451 ] 


[ — xix. 2 


The Anuhandhya 

cake is offered on five potsherds, for the Pankti has five Padas; the 
sacrifice is fivefold; verily (it serves) to obtain the sacrifice. But, if it 
is offered on eight potsherds, verily this is the model of the full moon 
sacrifice ; the full moon sacrifice is a support ; verily (it serves) for support. 
In that the invitatory and offering verses are Padapankti verses, this 
is obviously the symbol of the re-establishment (of the fires). So also 
are they interwoven.® When this has been completed, the sacrificer offers 
the Agnihotra, for on the completion of the establishment of the fires 
the Agnihotra is offered ; therefore, when this is completed, the sacrificer 
should offer the Agnihotra, (so they say). 

ADHYAYA XIX 

The Soma Sacrifice (continued). 

The Caturvihfa Day. 

xix. 1. They ^ being about to consecrate themselves gather together the 
fires; verily thus they place might and strength in one place in themselves. 
Then they perform the gathering together sacrifice ; they offer a cake on 
eight potsherds to Agni of the holy power, to Agni of the lordly power one 
on eleven potsherds, to Agni, supporter of the lordly power, one on twelve 
potsherds. Verily thus the sacrificers mount on the holy power and the 
lordly power ; verily thus with them in safety they pass over ® the year. 
Of many who are about to pile (the fire) this is the gathering together 
(offering), connected with the bringing together of the firepan ; ® for one 
who is about to consecrate himself it is the same. 

xix. 2. Then ^ they sacrifice with a victim for Prajapati, (thinking) ' Insti- 
gated by Prajapati,^ in safety let us attain this year.' Some make the cake 

* The verses are RV. iv. 10. 1-4 ; 1 and 3 are explains perhaps its continuing with 

used as invitatory and offering verses for ta etena, 

the oblation, 2 and 4 for the Svistakrt; xix. 2. ^ For the ritual see 95®. ix. 23. The 
hence they are interwoven. See viii. date of the Diksa is dealt with in 99S. xiii. 

18.4; ii. 5. 18, being taken from the Pu- 19: it has been repeatedly discussed in 

narSdheya. connexion with the parallel passages TS. 

^ For the Caturvih9a see AB. iv. 12-14. For vii. 4 . 8 ; PB. v. 9 ; see Weber, Naxaira, ii. 

the ritual see 95^. ix. 22. 341 seq, ; Thibaut, Jnd. Ant, xxiv. 89 seq, ; 

* caraWt is only an obvious correction, though Whitney, JAOS. xvi. Ixxxyi seq, ; Vedic 

read in the Anand. ed. IndeXy i. 420-427. See also Ap^S. xxi. 16. 

* For ukhd samhharaniydy ukhdsam^ is to be 4-6 ; B^S. xvi. 18. 

read, though both edd. separate. The * The Anand. ed. and M have praodpatiji 
two words probably go together and the prasutdy which error — a transposition of 

new sentence begins at sd. The whole the h — points to the use by Anand. of a 

clauseafter to? awh' is omitted by M, which MS. with affinities with M though not 

of its tradition. 



[452 


xix. 2 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

for it for Vayu (saying), * Vayu is clearly the symbol of Prajapati.* Others 
again make it for Agni as desire ; Agni as desire is lord of the gods ; verily 
(it serves) to delight all the gods. Some make the cake for the victim for 
Vaifvanara; Vai9vanara is he yonder that gives heat; verily thus they 
delight him. They make ready beforehand the Soma pressings ® for the 
consecration. ‘-They should consecrate themselves on one day after the 
new moon of Taisa or of Magha,’ they say ; both of these views are current, 
but that as to Taisa is the more current ^ as it were. They obtain this 
thirteenth additional month ; the year is as great as this thirteenth month ; 
in it verily the whole year is obtained. 

xix. 3. On the new moon of Magha he rests, being about to turn north- 
wards; these also rest, being about to sacrifice with the introductory Atiratra; 
thus for the first time they obtain him ; on him they lay hold with the 
Caturvih9a ; that is why the laying hold rite has its name. He goes north 
for six months ; him they follow with six-day periods in forward arrange- 
ment. Having gone north for six months he stands still, being about to 
turn southwards ; these also rest, being about to sacrifice with the Visuvant 
day; thus for the second time they obtain him. He goes south for six 
months ; him they follow with six-month periods in reverse order. Having 
gone south for six months he stands still, being about to turn north ; these 
also rest, being about to sacrifice with the Mahavrata day ; thus for the 
third time they obtain him. In that they obtain him thrice, and the year 
is in three ways arranged, verily (it serves) to obtain the year. With regard 
to this this sacrificial verse is sung, 

Ordaining the days and nights, 

Like a cunning^ spider, 

For six months south constantly,* 

For six north the sun goeth. 

For six months he goes north, six south. They should not consecrate 
themselves at this time; the corn has not arrived, the days are short; 
shivering they come out from the final bath. Therefore they should not 
consecrate themselves at this time. They should consecrate themselves 
one day after the new moon of Caitra ; the corn has come, the days are 
long, not shivering do they come out from the final bath. Therefore that 
is the rule. 


s °prasumn in Bo is liaidly a real word (as is disapproved. 

taken by BR., MW.), but only a mis- ^ The comm, reads jUryaly which in the MSS* 
reading. O o appears as a r. U 

^ This is certainly the sense, not that Taisa ^ The daknnddiiyafy of M is a simple blunder. 



463] 


[ — ^xix. 6 


The Caturvihga Day 

xix. 4. Then ^ in the piling of the fire some offer this consecration sacrifice 
consisting of five oblations; the Pankti has five Padas; the sacrifice is 
fivefold; verily (it serves) to obtain the sacrifice. Then some offer this 
guest reception sacrifice, consisting of five oblations ; the Pankti has five 
Padas; the sacrifice is fivefold; verily (it serves) to obtain the sacrifice. 
Then he recites these many fire (verses) ; for they carry forward many fires ; 
they are four ; all this (universe) is fourfold ; verily (they serve) to obtain 
all this. (He recites) the first thrice and the last thrice ; they make up 
eight ; the Gayatri has eight syllables ; Agni is connected with the Gayatri 
and has the Gayatri as metre ; verily thus with their own metre they carry 
forward the fires. Then they pile for so much of the day ^ as they wish. 
Then they celebrate it when piled with Samans. Then they say to the 
Hotr, ‘ Mutter the Agni litany ’ ; (the fire) when piled becomes Rudra, the 
unappeased one of the gods ; him verily thus he appeases. He says the 
offering verse for V'ai 9 vanara distinctly, for he becomes distinct when 
they carry forward the fires. 

xix. 5. Thereafter is as the one-day rite ; the moving forward of the 
oblation holders, the carrying forward of Agni and Soma, the victim for 
Agni and Soma. The explanation of this has been given. Following on 
the cake for the victim for Agni and Soma, they offer oblations for the 
divine instigators; these deities are the lords of the pressings; them 
herein they delight ; they being ^ delighted herein instigate the offerings ; 
therefore are they instigators. They are eight; by them the gods 
attained all attainments {asUh) ; verily thus also the sacrificers by them 
attain all attainments. Here some offer the oblation of (the sacrifice) with 
all the Prsthas, (thinking) * The fire piling is all ; by all all let us obtain ' ; 
there are ten oblations ; the Viraj consists of sets of ten ; the Viraj is 
prosperity and proper food; (verily it serves) to obtain the Viraj as 
prosperity and proper food. Then they press (Soma) for as much of the 
day ^ as they wish. 

xix. 6. When ^ (the offering of) the omentum of the Anubandhya (cow) 


1 The rites here given are prescribed in 99®* 
ix. 24 and 25. Characteristically the 
direction for the Agni litany is anu^ansa 
not anvjapa. The rule is that he should 
recite the silent praise of the Ajya with 
the silent muttering of that 9astra also. 
The silent praise is the Agnyuktha 
(Anartlya on 99'^‘ 25. 2). 

* This seems the only possible sense oiydvad- 
aham, not recognized in the Lexx. So 


in KB. xix. 5 ad Jin , : any other rendering 
is open to grave objections. 

xix. 5. ^ For these two rites see 99^* 26 and 

27. Weber {Rdjasuya^ p. 29, n. 2) suggests 
that originally devasu meant * King 
impeller deva in the sense of King. But 
this is most improbable. 

2 Cf. KB. xix. 4, n. 2. 

xix. 6. ^ For this offering see 99®* 27. 4-7, 

who allows an offering of butter in the form 
of the animal sacrifice as a substitute. 



[454 


xix, 6 — ] The Soma Sacmjice 

has been completed, they proceed with the victim for Tvastr ; that for 
Tvastr is a pouring of seed ; in the hut of the wife they proceed ; in wives 
is seed poured. Inaudibly they proceed ; (the victim) for Tvastr is a pour- 
ing of seed ; inaudibly is seed poured. After surrounding it with fire they 
let it go ; they do not dispose of it, (thinking) ‘ (The victim) for Tvastr is 
a pouring of seed ; let us not dispose of seed poured before the time.’ They 
say ‘ Seeing that he invites these two deities, Tvastr and the lord of the 
forest, in what place are these two sacrificed to by him ? ’ In the fore-ofter- 
ings he sacrifices to these two deities ; then are these two sacrificed to 
by him. 

xix. 7. Following^ on the cake for the victim in the Anubandhya rite, 
they offer the oblations to the minor deities. The metres of him who offers 
the Soma sacrifice become exhausted ; the minor deities are the metres ; in 
that they offer oblations to the minor deities, thus (his metres) become 
unexhausted and fresh. The metres of him who offers the Soma sacrifice 
lose their sap ; the minor deities are the metres ; in that they offer obla- 
tions to the minor deities, verily (it serves) to confer sap on the metres. 
Now these are deities (rfm) and Prajapati is Ka ; therefore are they minor 
deities (clevikd). There are five oblations ; the Pankti has five Padas ; the 
sacrifice is fivefold ; verily (it serves) to obtain the sacrifice. Here some 
offer oblations to the female deities, (thinking) ‘ The fire piling is all ; by all 
all let us obtain.’ There are ten oblations; the Viraj consists of sets of 
ten ; the Viraj is prosperity and proper food ; (verily it serves) to obtain 
the Viraj as prosperity and proper food. Here some perform the offerings 
to appease the quarters, (thinking) ‘The fire piling is all; by all all let us 
obtain.’ There are six oblations ; the year has six seasons ; verily (it serves) 
to obtain the year. When the concluding rite has been completed, he should 
sacrifice with a milk mess to Mitra and Varuna ; the explanation of this has 
been given. ‘ No piler of the fire should indulge in sexual union without 
having offered this sacrifice,’ (they say). 

xix. 8. The Caturvin 9 a ^ is the beginning of the year ; therefore it is an 
Agnistoma, for the Agnistoma is the beginning of the sacrifices; verily 
thus at the beginning they delight the year. Some make it an Ukthya, 
for the equipoise of the sacrifice. It has the Caturvin 5 a Stoma ; the half 
months of the year are twenty-four ; verily (it serves) to obtain the year. 
There are in it three hundred and sixty Stotriyas ; ^ three hundred and 
sixty are the days of the year; verily (they serve) to obtain the year. 


1 For these rites see ix. 28. 
xix. 8. ^ For the ritual see 99®. xi. 2. 

® Each of the fifteen triplets is made into 


twenty-four according to the Caturvin 9 a 
Stoma rule : hence 15 x 24 » 860. 



466] The Caturvihga Day [ — xix. 9 

The Prstha (Stotra) in it is the Brhat (Saman) ; this is the second of the 
days ; the Brhat is the second of the Prsthas ; therefore is its Prstha the 
Brhat. Again the Mahavrata is fixed there where they approach the Catur- 
vihfa; the Brhat is in its place the Prstha of the Mahavrata; therefore 
(they say) ‘ Let the Brhat be the Prstha of this (day)/ It has the word 
‘ together ’ ; the year is uttered around about. There are in its verses the 
following symbols. ‘ The Hotr is born, the wise ’ is the Ajya ^ of eight verses 
in Gayatri metre ; the Stoma is in Gayatri metre ; that (^astra is perfect 
which accords with the Stoma. The Prauga is of Madhuchandas ; it is 
perfect ; in its model are other Praugas shaped, (thinking) ‘ May I have 
accomplished a rite successful from the beginning.’ ‘ Thee like a car for 
aid’ is the strophe^ of the Marutvatiya; ‘This drink, 0 bright one, is 
pressed’ is the antistrophe.^ This is the regular one-day form; the 
explanation of it has been given. 

xix. 9. ^ With what array, of one age, of one home ? ’ is the Marutvatiya.^ 
The ninth (verse) is ‘ Thou canst not be overthrown, O generous one, no 
one ’ ; with it he concludes, having recited in front of it the later verses, 
for they are verses to the Maruts, and this is connected (with Indra) only. 
There is in this (Qastra) ‘ The Maruts are joined together ’ containing ^ (the 
word) ‘ together ’ ; thus he refers to the year ; this is the symbol of this 
day. ‘ That was the highest in the worlds ’ is the Niskevalya,^ of Brhaddiva ; 
here the Hotr pours seed with the Brhaddiva, (thinking) ‘ That he propa- 
gates ^ yonder with the Mahavrata day,’ After each year the pouring of 
seed is fruitful. In this there is ‘Together they sing to thee, brought 
forward at the carouses,* containing ® (the word) ‘ together ’ ; thus he 
refers to the year; this is the symbol of this day. ^That of Savitr we 
choose ’ and ‘ To-day for us, O god Savitr ’ are the normal strophe ® and 
antistrophe ^ of the Vai 9 vadeva; the explanation of these two has been 
given. ‘ That desirable greatness of Savitr, the god ’ is the Savitr (hymn) ® ; 
it contains ^ (the word) ‘ together ’ in ‘ Wealth with oflspring for us together 


3 RV. ii. 5 (cited also in KB. xxi. 2). 

^ RV. viii. 6. 1-8 ; see above KB. xv. 2, 

® RV. viii. 2. 1-8 ; see above KB. xv. 2. 

RV. i. 165. Throughout, as in KB. xix. 8, 
the point is that the second day coincides 
with the Mahavrata day as falling really 
a year later at the end of the year Sattra 
before the final Atiratra, after the 
Da 9 aratra which concludes the last month 
of the year Sattra (see Hillebrandt, 
EituaUUteraturj p. 167), 

» RV. i. 165. 1. 


8 RV. X. 120 (also cited in KB. xxv. 11). 

* janayati expresses what it normally does, 

and so probably this sentence is to be 
given to the actor, not treated as a 
remark of the Brahmana. See for the 
idea AB. iv. 14. 

6 RV. X. 120. 2 d. 

• RV. V. 82. 1 (also cited in KB. xvi. 3). 

RV. V. 82. 4 (also cited in KB. xxii. 2 ; xxv. 9). 

8 RV. iv. 68 (also cited in KB. xxi. 2, 4 ; 

xxii. 2). 

9 RV. iv. 63. 7 d. 



[456 


xix. 9 The Soma Sacrifice 

may he instigate’; thus he refers to the year; this is the symbol of this 
day. ‘ They two, sky and earth, all weal producing’ is (the hymn) to sky 
and earth ; it contains “ (the word) ‘ together ’ in ‘ Force to be glorified may 
ye together instigate for us ’ ; thus he refers to the year ; this is the symbol 
of this day. ‘ Why hath the best, why hath the youngest come to us ? ’ 
is (the hymn’*) to the Rbhus; ‘Thus in the year to-day did ye discern’ 
(it contains ‘®) ; thus openly he refers to the year ; this is the symbol of 
this day. ‘The charioteer of the sacrifice, the lord of the folk’ is the 
Vaifvadeva hymn^* of (^aryata; it contains^® (the word) ‘together’ in 
‘Together have Indra, Mitra, and Varuna pondered’; thus he refers 
to the year ; this is the symbol of this day. ‘ To Vaifvanara the praise, 
increasing holy order’ is (the hymn) to Vai 9 vanara^®; it contains^’' (the 
word) ‘ together ’ in ‘ With skill, as (a carpenter’s) axe a car, he brings 
together ’ ; thus he refers to the year ; this is the symbol of this day. ‘ To 
the strong host, majestic, pious ’ is (the hymn) to the Maruts ; it con- 
tains (the word) ‘ together ’ in ‘ Together I adorn the words, powerful in 
the assemblies ’ ; thus he refers to the year ; this is the symbol of this day. 
‘ With the sacrifice make to increase the All-knower ’ is (the hymn) for 
Jatavedas ; ““ it contains (the word) ‘ together ’ in ‘ Together giving riches 
shine among us’; thus he refers to the year; this is the symbol of the 
day. These are the Agnimaruta hymns ; these are the hymns of this day. 
So the day is either an Agnistoma or an Ukthya ; ‘ an Agnistoma is it ’ 
is the view of Paingya, ‘ an Ukthya is it ’ is the view of Kausitaki. 

xix. 10. Some Saman chanters make this day have all the Stomas, (say- 
ing) ‘ By this day they obtained the six-day period, by the six-day period 
the year and the desires in the year ; the whole year is the six-day period.’ 
If they do this he should make the (^astra composed of the six-day period. 
The Ajya should be the Ajya of the first day ; the Prafiga the Praiiga of 
the second day ; the Marutvatiya the Marutvatiya of the third day ; the 
Niskevalya the Niskevalya of the fourth day ; the Vaifvadeva the Vai 9 va- 
deva of the fifth day ; the Agnimairuta the Agnimaruta of the sixth day. 
Then collecting all the verses of the Pratha Stotras and making them into 
Pragathas he should recite them after the Pragatha, to obtain the six-day 
period. Just as by this day the Saman chanters obtain the six-day period 


RV. i. 160 (also cited in KB. xx. 3 ; xxi, 2 ; 
XXV. 9). 

” RV, i. 160. 6d. 

** RV. i. 161 (also in KB. xxi. 4; xxiii. 8; 
XXV. 9). 

RV. i. 161. 3d. 

RV. X. 92 (also cited in KB. xxii. 2). 

15 RV. X. 92. 4 c. 


18 RV. iii. 2 (also in KB. xx. 4 j xxi. 4 ; 

xxii. 5 ; xxv. 9). 

11 RV. iii. 2. 1 d. 

i« RV. i. 64 (also in KB. xx. 3; xxii. 2). 

18 RV. i. 64. 1 d. 

RV. ii. 2 (also in KB. xx. 3). 

*1 RV. ii. 2. 6 h. 



[—XX. 1 


467] The Catxirvinga Day 

and by the six-day period the year and the desires in the year, so by this 
day the Hotr obtains the six-day period, and by the six- day period the year 
and the desires in the year. Indicating that he used to say, ‘ This is con- 
fusion.' ‘ Whatever Stoma the Saman chanters resort to, that he should not 
regard ; the (^astra which we have here already considered,^ from that he 
should not depart ; the two hymns^ “ With what array" and “ That was " are 
Stoma subduing ; verily he should not fall away from these two * (he 
used to say). 


ADHYAYA XX 

The Soma Sacrifice { continued ). 

The Ahhiplava Sadaha. 

XX. 1. The ^ year is a revolving wheel of the gods ; that is immortality ; 
in it is the there sixfold proper food, wild animals, domesticated animals, 
plants, trees, that which goes in the waters and that which swims. Mounted 
on this the gods move round all the worlds, the world of the gods, the world 
of the fathers, the world of the living, the wo?:ld of Agni without water,* 
the world of Vayu, established in moral order, the world of Indra, unconquer- 
able, the world of Varuna over the sky, the world of death the highest sky, 
the world of Brahman the welkin, the most real * of worlds the vault. In 
that they perform the Abhiplava, verily thus the sacrificers mount on the 
year ; in it they obtain this sixfold proper food, wild animals, domesticated 
animals, plants, trees, that which goes in the waters and that which swims. 
Twice they perform the Jyotis (Stoma); thereby they obtain a double 
portion of proper food, wild animals and domesticated animals. Twice 
they perform the Go ; thereby they obtain a double portion of proper food, 
plants and trees. Twice they perform the Ayus; thereby they obtain 
a double portion of proper food, that which goes in the waters and that 
which swims. 


^ M has pravocdma but this is not essential. 
The Anand. ed. has the regular blunder 
aiksydma ; it has prati^a for pradi^a, sug- 
gestive of prati as glossed by pradi^a, 

» RV. i. 164 ; x. 120. 

XX. 1. ^ For the Abhiplava Sadaha of the Sattra 
see AB. iv. 16-17. I he six days have the 
six forms of Jyotis, Go, Ayus, Go, Ayus, 
and Jyotis, the first and last being Agni- 

58 [h.o.s. 25] 


stomas, the rest Ukthyas, and the 
Samans being Rathantara and Brhat ; 
see xi. 4. 1-7. AB. has only a few 
remarks on it in iv. 15 ; of. A^S. vii. 
6-7. 

2 The Anand. ed. has upodakam. 

* saptamam is read in the Anand. ed. and in 
a marg. note in O from the hhdsya. It is 
clearly wrong. 



[468 


XX. 2 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

XX, 2. They perform the Jyotis as the first day ; it has the same symbols 
in its verses as the first day. ‘ Forward to the god Agni ’ is the Ajya,^ 
containing (the word) ‘ forward ’ ; what contains ‘ forward ’ is a symbol of 
the first day. The Praiiga is by Madhuchandas ; when the Bathantara 
Saman was created, the Praiiga by Madhuchandas was created after it ; 
thus he makes the rite successful with its symbol ; that rite is likely to cause 
success which is successful with its symbol. ‘ Thee like a car for aid ’ is 
the strophe of the Marutvatiya ; * ‘ This drink, 0 bright one, is pressed ’ 
is the antistrophe ; ® this is the normal one-day form ; the explanation 
of it has been given. ‘ Indra maketh for the car a way forward ’ is the 
Marutvatiya,* containing (the word) ‘ forward ’ ; what contains forward is 
a symbol of the first day. ‘ Come hither, standing on thy chariot seat ’ is the 
Niskevalya,® containing (the word) ‘ hither ’ ; what contains ‘ hither ’ is 
a symbol of the first day. ‘That of Savitr we choose’ and ‘To-day 
for us, O god Savitr’ are the normal strophe and antistrophe of the 
Vaifvadeva;® the explanation of these two has been given. ‘They 
yoke their minds, they also yoke their thoughts ’ is (the hymn) to Savitr,'^ 
containing (the word) ‘yoke’; what contains ‘yoke’ is a symbol of the 
first day. ‘ Forward sky and earth, increasing holy order, with the sacri- 
fices ’ is (the hymn) to sky and earth,® containing (the word) ‘forward’; 
what contains ‘ forward ’ is a symbol of the first day. ‘ Here, here in mind 
is your relationship, O heroes’ is (the hymn) to the Rbhus,® containing 
(the word) ‘ to ’ in ‘ Desiring they came to these with wealth ’ ; that is the 
symbol of the Bathantara, ‘ How, of what one of the gods, in this service % ’ 
is (the hymn) to the All-gods,'® containing the word ‘ hither ’ in ‘ Which one 
with aid wilt come hitherward ? ’ ; what contains ‘ hither ’ is a symbol of the 
first day. ‘To Vai^vanara with broad radiance bards’ is (the hymn) to 
Vai 9 vanara,'* containing (the word) ‘ forward ’ ; what contains ‘ forward ’ is 
a symbol of the first day, ‘Forward pressing, mighty and resounding’ 
is (the hymn) to the Maruts,'® containing (the word) ‘ forward ’ ; what con- 
tains ‘ forward ’ is the symbol of the first day. ‘ The Hotr goeth forward 
to the sacrifice with the power of him’ is (the hymn) to Jatavedas,'® 
containing (the word) ‘ forward ’ ; what contains ‘ forward ’ is the symbol of 


' RV. iii. 13 (also cited in KB. xxii. 1 ; xxiv. 
1 ; XXV. 3). 

* RV. viii. 68, 1-3 (also cited in KB. xv. 2), 

® RV. viii. 2. 1-3 (also cited in KB. xv. 2). 

< RV. V. 81 ; 59 s. xi. 4. 8. 

» RV. iii. 43 ; 59 S. xi. 4. 9. 

® RV. V. 82. 1 and 4 (also cited in KB. xix. 9). 
7 RV. V. 81 (also cited in KB. xxii. 1 ; xxv. 9). 


B RV. i. 159 (also cited in KB. xxii. 1). 

® RV. iii. 60 (also cited in KB. xxii. 1), 

RV. X. 64 (also cited in KB. xxi. 3) ; 55S, 
xi. 4. 10. 

** RV. iii. 83 (also cited in KB. xxi. 2 ; xxii. 

1 ). 

« RV. i. 87. 

w RV. i. 144 ; ggS. xi. 4. 13. 



[ — XX. 3 


469 ] 


The Ahhiplava Sadaha 


the first day. This world they move up to with the first day, Agni the 
god, the name the supreme essence of the deities; they confer speech 
upon themselves. 

XX. 8. They perform the Go as the second day ; the symbols in its verses 
are those of the second day. ‘ Thou hast a glory of rule ’ is the Ajya ^ con- 
taining (the j word) ‘apart* in ‘Thou, O active one {vicarmiie), fame*; 
this is the symbol of this atmosphere ; for this atmosphere is wide apart 
as it were. The Praiiga is by Grtsamada ; ^ when the Brhat Saman was 
created, the Praiiga by Grtsamada was created after it ; thus he makes 
the rite successful with its symbol ; that rite is likely to cause success which 
is successful with its symbol. ‘Lord of every man* is the strophe^ of 
the Marutvatiya, containing the word ‘ apart * ; the explanation of this 
has been given. ‘ Indra alone is the drinker of Soma ’ is the antistrophe, ^ 
containing (the word) ‘ apart ' in ‘ Indra, drinker of the pressed juice, of 
all life * ; the explanation of this has been given. ‘ Rise up, O Brahmanas- 
pati * is addressed to Brahmanaspati,® and contains (the word) ‘ up ’ ; there is 
‘up* in ‘ Rise up ’ ; the second day has ‘ up *. ‘ These thee of many a poet ’ 

is the Marutvatiya,® containing (the word) ‘ up * ; the explanation of this 
has been given. ‘Thou art mingled with the pressed drink, O Indra* 
is the Niskevalya,*^ containing (the word) ‘up* in ‘The Stoma, the prayer, 
the hymn being recited * ; the explanation of this has been given. ‘ Every 
man of the god that leadeth* is the strophe® of the Vai9vadeva, con- 
taining (the word) ‘apart*; the explanation of this has been given. 
‘ The god of all, lord of the good * is the antistrophe,® containing (the word) 
* apart * ; the explanation of this has been given. There are two strophes 
for the Vaifvadevas, two antistrophes; the year has six seasons and is six- 
fold; sky and earth are two; these supports are two; this body has 
six members ; day and night are two : these, expiration and inspiration, are 
two ; thus they depart not from the completion of the year, nor from the 
perfection of the body, nor the perfection of the breaths. ‘ The god 
Savitr hath appeared, to be praised by us now * is (the hymn) to Savitr, 
containing (the word) ‘ up * ; the explanation of this has been given. 
‘They two, sky and earth, all weal producing* is (the hymn) to sky 
and earth, containing (the word) ‘apart*; the explanation of this has 


adhihhutam means that the name (or force 
in KB. XX. 3 ; form, xx. 4) is the essence 
of the deities. 

1 RV. vi. 2. Here and repeatedly below the 

vi or is made up artificially. 

2 See 99 s. X. 3. 4, 5. 

3 RV. viii. 68. 4-6. 

< RV. viii. 2. 4-6. 


• RV. i. 40. 1, 2 (cited also in KB. ix. 6). 
e RV. vi. 21 ; 99 S. xi. 6. 1. 

7 RV. vi. 23 ; 99 S. xi. 6. 2. 

8 RV. V. 60. 1-3. 

» RV. V. 82. 7-9. 

JO RV. iv. 64. 

u RV. i. 160 (cited already in KB. xix. 9). 



[460 


XX. 3 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

been given. ‘My work hath been stretched, now is it stretched again' 
is (the hymn) to the Rbhus,^* containing the word ‘ up ' ; the explanation 
of this has been given. ‘ I hail the gods, of great fame, for security ' is 
(the hymn) to the All-gods,^® containing the word ‘ up ' ; the explanation 
of this has been given. ‘The might of the swift, strong, ruddy one' is 
(the hymn) to ,Vai9vanara,^^ containing (the word) ‘strong*; Indra is 
strong, the Tristubh is strong ; therefore it contains ‘ strong '. ‘ To 

the strong host, majestic, pious ’ is (the hymn) to the Maruts ; the explana- 
tion of this has been given. ‘ By the sacrifice make to increase the All- 
knower'is (the hymn) to Jatavedas^® containing ‘up' in ‘Kindled, well 
fed, hero of heaven ’ ; the explanation of this has been given. The 
world of the atmosphere with the second day they obtain, Indra the 
god, force the supreme essence of the deities ; they confer breath upon 
themselves. 

XX. 4. They perform the Ayus as the third day ; the S3nnbols in its verses 
are those of the third day. ‘ Thou, O Agni, the Vasus here ’ is the Ajya ; ^ 
self collected is that metre which accords with the symbol of the day; 
there is (the word) ‘thou' in ‘O thou of the ruddy steeds, singer, bring 
hither the three and thirty ' ; that is the symbol of the third day. The 
Praliga is in Usnih verses by Vi9vamanas;* when the Rathantara Saman 
was created, the Praliga in Usnih by Vi9vamanas was created after it; 
thus he makes the rite successful with its symbol ; that rite is likely to 
cause success which is successful with its symbol. ‘ Him for great gain ' 
is the strophe of the Marutvatiya ; ^ at ‘ him ' ^ there is a repetition ; the 
third day is the end ; having gone to the end he repeats as it were, for 
hence whitherward should he go ? ‘ Three Soma draughts for Indra ' is the 

antistrophe.® This is the symbol of the third day. ‘ Let Brahmanaspati 
move forward ', containing (the word) ‘ forward ', is addressed to Brah- 
manaspati ® ; there is repetition ^ in ‘ Forward let the kindly goddess move ' ; 
the third day is the end ; having gone to the end he repeats as it were ; 
for hence whitherward should he go? There are three strophes of the 
Marutvatiyas, three antistrophes, three (Pragathas) for Brahmanaspati; 


W RV. i. 110 (cited also in KB. xxi. 3) ; ggS. 
xi. 6. 4. 

RV. X. 66 (cited also in KB. xxiv. 9 ; xxv. 
9) ; 99s. xi. 6. 6. 

RV. vi. 8 (cited also in KB. xxi. 3 ; xxii. 2). 
RV. i. 64 (cited already in KB. xix. 9). 

RV. ii. 2 (cited already in KB. xix. 9) ; 
99s. xi. 5. 7. 

’ RV. i. 46 (cited also in KB. xxii. 3). 

2 RV. viii. 26. 23-25 (cf. 99S. xi. 6. 2) ; iv. 46. 


3-6 ; viii. 26. 1-3 ; 26. 4-6 ; 24. 1-8 ; 26. 
10-12 ; vi. 61. 10-12. 

« RV. viii. 68. 7-9. 

* I. e. in tdm tarn of RV. viii. 68, 7. 

5 RV. viii. 2. 7-9. 

« RV. i. 40. 3, 4 (a Pragatha). 

^ RV. i. 40. 8. ninrtii denotes repetition of 
a word or part (o. g. xxi. 4). Cf. AB. v. 
1 and 12, and the classical Anuprasa. 



[ — XX. 4 


461] The Ahhiplava Sadaha 

these worlds are three ; verily thus they obtain these worlds. ‘ Stand on 
the bays being yoked to the car’ is (the hymn*) containing (the word) 
‘ stand ’ ; it is the symbol of the end ; the third day is the end ; having 
gone to the end he stands as it were, for hence whitherward should he 
go. ‘I shall proclaim the manly deeds of Indra’ is the Niskevalya ; * 
it contains the symbol of ending in the reference to what has been ; ‘ He 
slew the dragon, he penetrated the waters ’ is about what has been as it 
were. ‘Hitherwards the god Savitr with the golden’ is (the hymn) to 
Savitr;^* it contains (the word) ‘ghee’ in ‘With ghee both hands he 
imbueth, the sacrificer’; the ghee has many deities; the third pressing 
has many deities ; therefore it contains (the word) ‘ ghee ’. ‘ In ghee sky 
and earth enveloped’ is (the hymn) to sky and earth, containing (the 
word) ‘ghee’; the explanation of this has been given. ‘They have 
wrought the car well covered, skilled workers’ is (the hymn) to the 
Rbhus ; there is repetition in ‘ They have wrought the two steeds, that 
bear Indra, strong in riches ’ ; the third day is the end ; having come to 
the end he repeats as it were, for hence whitherward should he go 1 ‘To 
us from all sides may favouring powers come’ is (the hymn) for the 
All-gods ; there is repetition in ‘ Unfailing guardians day by day ’ ; the 
third day is the end ; having gone to the end, he repeats as it were, for hence 
whitherward should he go? ‘To Vai 9 vanara, the praise, increasing holy 
order’ is (the hymn) to Vaijvanara;** in ‘Like purified ghee to Agni 
we present’ it contains (the word) ‘ghee’; the explanation of this has 
been given. ‘The Rudras, with Indra, accordant’ is (the hymn) to the 
Maruts ; it contains the words ‘ from the sky ’ in ‘ Like springs of water 
from the sky for a thirsty man’; this is the symbol of yonder world. 
‘ Thee, 0 Agni, the righteous have kindled ’ is (the hymn) to Jatavedas,** 
beginning with the same word ‘ Thee’ (in each verse) ; just as that with 
the same end, so that with the same beginning is a symbol of the end. 
They obtain yonder world with the third day, Aditya the god, the form 
the supreme essence of the deities ; they confer sight upon themselves. 


* RV. iii. 86 (cited also in KB. xxvi. 16) ; 

ggs. xi, 6. 8. 

* RV. i. 82 (cited already in KB. xv. 4). 

« RV. vi. 71. 

•> RV. vi. 70. 4-6 (also cited in KB. xxi. 4) ; 
55s. xi. 6. 6. 


» RV. i. Ill (also cited in KB. xxii. 2). 

» RV. i. 89. 

RV. iii. 2 (already cited in KB. xix. 9). 
« RV. V. 67 ; 99s. xi. 6. 8. 

« RV. V. 8; ggs. xi. 6. 8. 



xxi. 1 — ] 


The Soma Sacrifice 


[462 


ADHYAYA XXI 

The Soma Sacrifice {continued). 

•The Ahhiplava Sadaha {continued). 

xxi. 1. The gods, desirous of smiting away death, the evil, and desiring 
identity of world and union with Brahman, saw this Abhiplava six-day 
(rite); by this Abhiplava they approach, and having smitten away 
death, the evil, obtained identity of world and union with Brahman;^ 
verily thus also the sacrificers approach by the Abhiplava, and having 
smitten away death, the evil, obtain identity of world and union with 
Brahman. Having approached with the first set of three days, they 
sacrificed on the fourth day with the Go, for going; they performed 
the Ayus as the fifth day, to secure full life; the Jyotis as the sixth 
day they put around behind again, to prevent evil following after. 

xxi. 2. They perform the Go as the fourth day ; the symbols in its verses 
are those of the fourth day. * The Hotr is born, the wise " is the Ajya,^ 
containing (the word) ‘born’; that which contains (the word) ‘born’ 
is a symbol of the fourth day. The Praliga is by Medhatithi;^ as 
the Brhat Saman was created, the Praiiga by Medhatithi was created 
after it; thus he makes the rite successful with its symbol; that rite 
is likely to cause success which is successful with its symbol. ‘ Thou hast 
been born dread, for impetuous strength ’ is the Marutvatlya,^ containing 
(the word) ‘ born ’ ; that which contains ‘ born ’ is a symbol of the fourth 
day. ‘He hath been born dread for strength, possessed of will’ is the 
Niskevalya,^ containing (the word) ‘ born ’ ; that which contains (the word) 
‘ born ’ is a symbol of the fourth day. ‘ That desirable greatness of the 
god Savitr’ is (the hymn) to Savitr,® containing (the word) ‘born’ in 
‘ Savitr hath made to be born the hymn of good will ’ ; that which 
contains (the word) ‘ bom ’ is a symbol of the fourth day. ‘ They two, 
sky and earth, all weal producing ’ is (the hymn) to sky and earth,® con- 
taining (the word) ‘born’ in ‘Between the two presses of noble birth 
he goeth’;*^ that which contains (the word) ‘born’ is a symbol of the 


* Cf. PB. XXV. 18. 6 ; TA. x. 16 ; ^B. xi. 4. 4. 

2-7 ; NTU. i. 1. 7; Weber, Ind. Stud. i. 
896-403 ; ix. 87, 88. 

xxi. 2. ^ RV. ii. 6 (already cited in KB. xix. 8) ; 
958. xi. 7. 1. 

* RV. i. 23. 1 ; see 99 S. xi. 7. 2. 

* RV. X. 78 (already cited in KB. xv. 3). 


< RV. vii. 20 ; 99 S xi. 7. 7. 

® RV. iv. 63 (already cited in KB. xix. 9). 

® RV. i. 160 (already cited in KB. xix. 9). 

^ RV. i 160. 1 c ; dhizane is of disputed sense ; 
see Ilillebrandt, Ved. Myth. i. 177; Fcdic 
Index, i. 399, 400 ; ii. 476. 



463] The Ahhiplava Sadaha [— xxi. 3 

fourth day. ‘Bom without steed, without reins, worthy of praise’ is 
(the hymn) to the Rbhus,® containing (the word) ‘ born ’ ; that which contains 
(the word) ‘bom’ is a symbol of the fourth day. ‘ Agni, Indra, Varuna, 
Mitra, Aryaman' is (the hymn) to the All-gods,® containing (the word) 

‘ born ’ in ‘ Having caused the sacrifice to be bom they wipe their bodies ’ ; 
that which contains (the word) ‘ bom ’ is a symbol of the fourth day. ‘ To 
Vaifvanara with broad radiance bards ’ is (the hymn) to Vai^vanara,^® con- 
taining (the word) ‘hither’ in ‘In him the sacrificer looks hither for 
favour’; that which contains (the word) ‘hither’ is a symbol of the 
fourth day as an opening ceremony, for the fourth day is a repetition of 
the opening ceremony.^^ In ‘Bom thou didst fill the worlds, the two 
firmaments ’, it contains (the word) ‘ bom ’ ; that which contains (the word) 

‘ bom ’ is a symbol of the fourth day. ‘ Those that shine forth, like 
women, the racers ’ is (the hymn) to the Maruts,^^ containing (the word) 

‘ born ’ ; that which contains (the word) ‘ born ’ is a symbol of the fourth 
day. ‘ He hath been bom, guardian of men, wakeful ’ is (the hymn) to 
Jatavedas,^^ containing (the word) ‘ born ’ ; that which contains (the word) 

‘ born’ is a symbol of the fourth day. Food with the fourth day they 
obtain, the moon the god, the quarters the supreme essence of the deities ; 
the ear they confer upon themselves. 

xxi. 3. They perform the Ay us as the fifth day ; the symbols in its verses 
are those of the fifth day. ‘O Agni, bring the mightiest’ is the Ajya,^ 
containing (the word) ‘wealth* in (the word) ‘wealth’ in ‘Forward for us 
with wealth, with abundance ’ ; containing (the word) ‘ wealth * is a symbol of 
this (day) ; it also contains an addition ; ^ this is the symbol of the Pankti. 
The Prauga is one to be gathered together ; ^ when the Rathantara Saman 
was created, the Prauga which is to be gathered together was created 
after it ; thus he makes the rite successful with its symbol ; that rite is 
likely to cause success, which is successful with its symbol. ‘Where is 
this hero, who hath seen Indra?’ is the Marutvatiya,^ containing (the 
word) ‘ wealth ’ in (the word) ‘ wealth ’ in ‘ The bearer of the bolt seeking 
the pressed Soma with wealth’; containing (the word) ‘wealth’ is the 
symbol of this. ‘ Come, let us approach Indra, seeking for cows ’ is the 
Niskevalya,^ containing (the word) ‘cattle’ in ‘seeking for cows’; con- 


® RV. iv. 36 (also cited in KB. xxii. 6). 

’ RV. X. 65 (also cited in KB. xxiv. 9) ; 59^* 
xi. 7. 10. 

10 RV. iii. 3 (already cited in KB. xx. 2). 

11 RV. iii. 3. 3 d and 10 c. 

1* RV. i. 85; 99S. xi. 7. 12. 
i» RV. V. 11. 

1 RV. V. 10 ; 99 s. xi. 8. 1. 


* The last verse of RV. v. 10 (as also v. 4) has 

an extra Pada : hence adhydsa, 

® The actual composition is given in 99®* 

8. 2, 3. 

* RV. V. 30 (also cited in KB. xxiv. 5 ; xxvi. 

12) ; 998 . xi. 8. 4. 

0 RV. i. 33 ; 99 S. xi. 8. 5. 



xxi. 3 — ] The Soma Sacrifice (464 

frilling (the word) ‘cattle’ ia the symbol of this. ‘Hitherward the god 
Savitr with the golden’ is (the hymn) to Savitr,® containing (the word) 
‘ghee ’ in ‘ With ghee both hands he imbueth, the sacrificer ’ ; in ‘ ghee ’ it 
contains (the word) ‘cattle’; containing (the word) ‘cattle’ is a sjnnbol of this. 
‘ Rich in ghee, ^compassing the worlds’ is (the hymn) to sky and earth,’ 
cnTitftini'ng (the word) ‘ghee’; the explanation of this has been given. 
‘My work hath been stretched; now is it stretched again’ is (the hymn) 
to the Rbhus,* containing (the word) ‘ghee’ in ‘As ghee with the ladle 
let us offer with knowledge ’ ; the explanation of this has been given. 
‘ How, of what one of the gods, in this service 1 ’ is (the hymn) to the 
All-gods,® containing (the word) ‘cattle’ in ‘Winners of thousands’ in 
‘ Winners of thousands in the attainment of the offering, by themselves’;’® 
containing (the word) ‘ cattle ’ is the symbol of this. ‘ The might of the 
swift, strong, ruddy one’ ia (the hymn) to Vai^vanara,” containing (the 
word) ‘ cattle ’ in ‘ the bulls ’ in ‘ The bulls seized them in the lap of the 
waters’;’® containing (the word) ‘cattle’ is the symbol of this. ‘Your 
spy hath called to you to accord favour ’ is (the hymn) to the Maruts,’® 
containing (the word) ‘cattle’ in ‘as of kine’ in ‘As of kine the lofty 
bom for splendour ’ ; ” containing (the word) ‘ cattle ’ is the symbol of this. 
‘Wonderous is the growth of the tender young one’ is (the hymn) to 
Jatavedas,’® containing (the word) ‘ strong ’ in ‘ To the most strong, the 
mighty, 0 thou of a good father ’ ; ’« this is a symbol of this day ; it 
contains an addition. Cattle by the fifth day they obtain, Rudra the god, 
fame the supreme essence of the deities ; they confer strength upon 
themselves. 

xxi. 4. They perform the Jyotis as the sixth day ; the symbols in its 
verses are those of the sixth day. ‘O friends, together the seemly’ is 
the Ajya ; ’ ‘ 0 friends ’ is the symbol of all ; the sixth day has the symbol 
all; therefore in ‘O friends’ he refers to all. The Praiiga® is one to be 
gathered together; when the Brhat Saman was created, the Praiiga which 
is to be gathered together was created after it ; thus he makes the rite 
successful with its symbol ; that rite is likely to cause success which is 
successful withits symbol. ‘ Great is Indra, manlike, spreading over mortala ’ 
is the Marutvatiya ; ® there is repetition in ‘ He hath become broad, wide. 


• BV. Ti. 71 (already cited in KB. viii. 7). 
^ BV. Ti. 70 (also cited in KB. xxiii. 5). 
s BV. 1 110 (already cited in KB. xx. 3). 

» BV. X. 64 (already cited in KB. xx. 2). 
BV. X. 64. 6 c. 

o BV. vi. 8 (already cited in KB. xx. 3). 
i» BV. vi. 8. 4. 

” BV. V. 6Vj 95s. xi. 8. 7. 


«« BV. V. 69. 8. 

« BV. X. 115 ; 99s. xi. 8. 7. 

» BV. X. 116. 6. The addition is the last 
9Bkvar! verse. 

1 BV. V. 7 ; 99s. xi. 9. 1. 

' For the composition see 99^* 

» BV. vi. 19 (also cited in KB. xxvi. 12) ; 
99s. xi, 9. 4. 



465 ] 


[ — xxi. 5 


The Ahhiplava Sadaha 

well made by the makers ’ ; the sixth day is the end ; having gone to the 
end, he repeats as it wore, for hence whitherward should he go? ‘He 
who is born the first, the wise * is the Niskevalya ; ^ it contains a symbol 
of ending in the reference to what has been; ‘He who hath in secret 
depressed the hostile colour ’ is about what has been as it were. It has the 
same ending; that is a second symbol of the end. ‘That desirable great- 
ness of Savitr, the god ’ is (the hymn) to Savitr ; ^ there is ‘ of the sky ’ 
in ‘ Prajapati, supporter of the sky, of the earth ' ; this is the symbol of 
yonder world. ‘With ghee sky and earth enveloped’ is (the hymn) to 
sky and earth,® containing (the word) ‘ ghee ’ ; ghee has all as its deity ; 
the sixth day has all as its deity ; therefore it contains (the word) * ghee 
‘ Why hath the best, why hath the youngest come to us ? ’ is (the hymn) to 
the Rbhus ; there is repetition in ‘ the best, the youngest ’ ; the sixth day 
is the end ; having gone to the end, he repeats as it were, for hence 
whitherward should he go? ‘These fires with Indra have awakened* 
is (the hymn) to the All-gods ; ® in that it has the same ending it is a 
symbol of the end. ‘To Vai^vanara the praise, increasing holy order* 
is (the hymn) to Vai^vanara;® containing (the word) ‘ghee* in ‘Like 
pure ghee to Agni we accord*; the explanation of this has been given. 
‘Rich in showers, the Maruts of daring might* is (the hymn) to the 
Maruts ; there is repetition in ‘ rich in showers * ; the sixth day is the 
end, having gone to the end, he repeats as it were, for hence whitherward 
should he go? ‘Thou, O Agni, with the days, the shining* is (the hymn) 
to Jatavedas;^^ in ‘Thou* it has the same beginning; just as that with 
the same end, so that with the same beginning is a symbol of the end. 
The waters by the sixth day they obtain, Prajapati the god, brilliance 
the supreme essence of the deities ; the immortal they confer on 
themselves. 

xxi. 5. They ^ say ‘ Why are (the litanies) for the All-gods expanded, and 
not those for one deity or for two deities ? * No exhaustion arises through 
that for one deity or that for two deities, but exhaustion does arise through 
that for the All-gods ; therefore those for the All-gods only are expanded, 
to secure the might of these days, to prevent exhaustion of the Abhiplavas. 
They perform the Jyotis as the first day, with the symbol of the one day 
(rite), for the one day (rite) is the light of the other days ; the Go as the 

* RV. ii. 12 (also cited in KB. xxii. 4) ; 99 S. ® RV. x. 86 ; xi. 9. 7. 

RV. iii. 2 (already cited in KB. xix. 9). 

c RV. iv. 63 (already cited in KB. xix. 9). JO RV. ii. 84 (also cited in KB. xxii.5) ; CCS. 
® RV. vi. 70. 4-6 (already cited in KB. xx. 4). xi. 9. 8. 

^ RV. i. 161 (already cited in KB. xix. 9). RV. ii. 1. 

The ninrtti is in the sthah. 1 Cf. AB. iv. 16. 

59 [h.o.s. 



xxi. 6 — ] 


[466 


The Soma Sacrifice 

second day, for they go by it ; the Ayus as the third day, for they move 
by it. The first and last days are Agnistoinas, in the middle are four 
Ukthyas; the Agnistoma is the holy power; the Ukthyas are cattle; 
verily thus by the holy power having surrounded cattle on both sides 
they confer them upon themselves. Of these four Ukthyas there are 
a thousand verses in the Stotras ; cattle are connected with a thousand ; a 
thousandfold prosperity he obtains who knows thus. Hence they perform 
sets of four Abhiplavas, ending with a Prsthya ; the Abhiplavas are cattle ; 
the Prsthyas are prosperity ; verily thus having encompassed prosperity on 
both sides with cattle they confer it upon themselves. From the Vifvajit 
they perform sets of four Abhiplavas beginning with a Prsthya; the 
Abhiplavas are prosperity; the Prsthyas are cattle; verily thus with 
prosperity having encompassed cattle on both sides they confer them upon 
themselves. 

xxi. 6. The Abhiplava is a definitely arranged (sacrifice) with definite 
metres. The Nivids inserted in a sacrificial rite which has definite metres 
are all in Jagati at the third pressing. So duly are the Nivids inserted ; 
they being duly inserted place them duly in all worlds and in all desires. 
In that the Nivids are inserted all in Jagati at the third pressing, thereby 
is there obtained whatever is desired in a third pressing all of Jagati 
(verses). Again, in that day by day these Tristubh verses from the model are 
recited, thereby is there obtained whatever is desired in a third pressing all 
of Tristubh (verses). Again, in that day by day this Gayatri^ from the 
model, ' Maker of fair forms is recited, thereby is there obtained whatever 
is desired in a third pressing all of Gayatri. In that this six-day (rite) 
repeatedly approaches {ahhiplavate), therefore is it called Abhiplava, for by 
it the sacrificers approach the world of heaven. 

ADHYAYA XXII 

The Soma Sackib'ice {continued). 

The Prspiya Sadaha. 

xxii. 1 . The first day is this world in abode, Agni, the Gayatri, the Trivrt 
Stoma, the Kathantara Saman, the base by Tanva.' It has the following 
symbols in its verses : the future tense with the god mentioned in the first 
Pada — that which is to be is the future tense — (the word) ‘hither*, (the 

1 RV. 1. 4. 1 ; see 95S. viii. 8. 13. form. Tanva(cf. Ind. Stud, iii. 217 ; Puspa 

xxii. i. ^ The enumerdtioii of the facts in this Sutraj v. 252, with Simonas note) must be 

catalogue shape is a precursor of the a man here, though not so taken by 

regular style of introduction of spells of Lindner. For the contents see AB. iv. 

all sorts in the Tantra literature as in 29 and 30 ; 9?®* 2. 

Buddhist texts. Cf. the end for the full 



467] The Pr^thya ^daha [ — xxii. i 

word) ‘ forward (the word) ‘ this (the word) ‘ go (the word) ‘ adorn 
(the word) ‘yoked’, (the word) ‘yoking’, (the word) ‘light’, (the word) 

‘ bright ’. ‘ Advancing forward up to the sacrifice ’ is the Ajya,* containing 
(the word) ‘forward’; that which contains ‘forward’ is a symbol of the 
first day ; it is in Gayatri, for this set of three days has the Gayatri at the 
morning pre&sing. So in the transposed form.® Taking out that, ‘ Forward 
to the god, Agni ’ is used in the conjunct form;* the explanation of this has 
been given. The Praiiga is by Madhuchandas ; * the explanation of this has 
been given. ‘Let Indra come hither to aid us’ is the Marutvatiya,® containing 
(the word) ‘hither’ ; that which contains (the word) ‘hither’ is a symbol of 
the first day ; there is a reference to the Maruts in it in ‘ From the realm 
of light, with the Maruts, to aid us ‘ Hither to us, Indra, hither to us 
from afar, from near’ is the Niskevalya,® containing (the word) ‘hither’; 
that which contains ‘ hither’ is a symbol of the first day. The Niskevalya 
and the Marutvatiya are contiguous (hymms) on the first day; by the 
contiguous (hymns) the gods flow up to the world of heaven together; 
therefore these two are recited first aj# being heavenly. In that the 
Niskevalya and the Marutvatiya are contiguous (hymns) on the first day, 
verily (they serve) to obtain the world of heaven. ‘ They yoke their minds, 
they also yoke their thoughts V ‘ Forward sky and earth, increasing holy 
order, with the sacrifices and ‘ Here, here in mind is your relationship, 
O heroes “ ’ ; (the last) is (the hymn) to the Rbhus ; with it he restrains ; 
on the first day are recited hymns containing (the word) ‘ yoked ’ as well as 
(the word) ‘ forward ’ ; in that he uses as (the hymn) to the Rbhus, ‘ Here, 
here is your,’ it is a symbol of restraint, of preventing falling away. ‘ Like 
a skilled steed, he hath yoked himself to the pole ’ is (the hymn) to the 
All-gods,>® containing (the word) ‘yoked’; that which contains (the word) 
‘ yoked ’ is a symbol of the first day. The last two (verses) of it he omits. 
(Now they ask) ‘Shall these two prescribed be recited in the Agnimaruta?’ 
Kausitaki used to say ‘ He should recite (them), to avoid breaking up the 
hymn ; the Rc is not exhausted by the litany nor by the supplementary 
repetition ; it is by the vaaut call alone that it becomes exhausted on one 
day.’ ‘To Vai^vanara with broad radiance bards ’ is (the hymn) to Vaiyva- 

2 RV. i. 74 (already cited in KB. xi, 4). ^ RV. iv. 21. 3 c. 

* See 99*^- X. 2. 2 w ith Anartlya, who quotes ^ RV. iv. 20 ; 99S. x. 2. 5. 

the Brahmana as usual : the rendering ® RV. v. 82 ; see above KB. xx. 2. 

transposed is conventional ; * altered ’ RV. i. 159 ; see above KB. xx. 2 ; 99 S. x. 

would do, but for the contrast with 2. 7. 

samulha below. RV. iii. 60 j see above KB. xx, 2 ; 99 S. x. 

* RV. iii. 13 (already cited in KB. xx. 2), 2. 7. 

99 s. X. 2. 2 and vii. 10. 8 seq. » RV. v. 46 ; 99 S. x. 2, 7, 

6 RV. iv. 21 ; 99 s. X. 2. 4. 



xxii. 1 — ] T}ie Soma Sacrijice [468 

nara/® containing (the word) ‘forward’; that which contains (the word) 
‘forward’ is a symbol of the first day. ‘Forward to the horde of the 
Mai-uts, self -radiant ’ is (the hymn) to the Maruts,“ containing (the word) 
‘ forward ’ ; that which contains (the word) ‘ forward ’ is a symbol of the 
first day. ‘Forward the strong, new, hymn to Agni’ is (the hymn) to 
Jatavedas,^® containing (the word) ‘forward’; that which contains (the 
word) ‘ forward ’ is a symbol of the first day. This world with the first 
day they obtain, the Gayatri metre, the Trivrt Stoma, the Rathantara 
Saman, the eastern quarter, the spring of seasons, the Vasus the gods, 
Agni, bom of the gods, the overlord. 

xxii. 2. The second day is the world of the atmosphere in its abode, 
Indra, the Tristubh, the Pancadaga Stoma, the Brhat Saman, the basis by 
Tanva. It has the following symbols in its verses : the present tense with 
the god mentioned in the middle Pada — the present is what is before the 
eyes, but not tangible— (the word) ‘ deities ’, (the word) ‘ thunderbolt ’, (the 
word) ‘slaying Vrtra’, (the word) ‘strong’, (the word) ‘apart’, (the words) 
‘ stand ’, ‘ him ’, and ‘ thou ’. ‘ Agni wo choose as envoy ’ is the Ajya,' con- 
taining the word ‘ apart ’ in ‘ The Hotr of all knowledge ’ ; the explanation 
of this has been given. It is in Gayatri, for this set of three days has the 
Gayatri at the morning pressing. So in the transposed form. Taking out that, 
‘ For thou hast a glory of rule ’ is used in the conjunct form ; the explanation 
of this has been given. The Praiiga is by Grtsamada;® the explanation 
of this has been given. ‘ O Indra, drink this Soma, O lord of the Soma ’ is 
the Marutvatiya,® containing (the word) ‘ thunderbolt ’ in ‘ At the midday 
pressing, O thou with the thunderbolt in thy hand ’ ; this is a symbol of 
this day. ‘Thy nearest, farthest, help’ is the Niskevalya,® containing (the 
word) ‘ slaying Vrtra ’ in ‘ With these thou hast helped us in slaying Vrtra ’ ; 
this is a symbol of this day. ‘ That desirable greatness of Savitr, the god ’ 
is (the hymn) to Savitr,® containing ‘Three times the atmosphere Savitr 
with his greatness ’ ; this is openly the symbol of the atmosphere. ‘ They 
two, sky and earth, all weal producing ’ is (the hymn) to sky and earth,® con- 
taining (the word) ‘ apart ’ ; the explanation of this has been given. ‘ They 
have wrought the car well covered, skilled workers ’ is (the hymn) to the 
Rbhus,^ containing (the word) ‘strong’ in ‘They have wrought the two steeds, 
that bear Indra, strong in riches’; the explanation of this has been given. ‘ The 

RV. iii. 3 (already cited in KB. xx. 2). ‘ RV. vi. 26 (als.0 cited in KB. xxiv. 2) ; 

n RV. V. 64 ; ^gS. x. 2. 8. x. 3. 9. 

'• RV. i. 143. ® HV. iv. 68 (already cited in KB. xix. 9) ; 

• RV. i. 12 (already cited in KB. i. 4), or vi. 2 9gS. x. 3. 14. 

(already cited in KB. xx. 3) ; ggS. x. 8. •* RV. i. 160 (already cited in KB. xix. 9) ; 

2, 8. Cf. AB. iv. 81, 32. 99S. x. 8. 14. 

* See KB. xx. 8 ; ggS. x. 3. 4, 5. ’’ KV. i. Ill (alieady cited in KB. xx. 4). 

’ RV. iii. 82 ; ggS. x. 3. 8. 



469] The Prsthya Sadaha [ — xxii. 4 

charioteer of the sacrifice, the lord of the folk ' is (the hymn) to the All-gods 
by Qaryata,® containing (the word) ‘ strong ’ in ‘ The strong banner, the holy 
one, hath attained the sky ’ ; the explanation of this has been given. ‘ The 
might of the swift, strong, ruddy one ’ and ‘ To the strong host, majestic, 
pious ' are (two hymns) containing (the word) ‘ strong ’ ; the explanation 
of them has been given.® ‘ The immortal, born of strength, doth penetrate ’ 
is (the hymn) to Jatavedas,^® containing (the word) ‘apart' in ‘What time 
he became a messenger of Vivasvant’; the explanation of this has been 
given. The last verse of it is ‘ Early and soon at the prayer may the 
bright one come'; verily thus he refers to the next day;^^ ‘Verily thus 
they keep taking hold of the next day ' Kausitaki used to say. The world 
of the atmosphere with the second day they obtain, the Tristubh metre, the 
Paficada 9 a Stoma, the Brhat Saman, the southern quarter, the summer of 
the seasons, the Maruts the gods, Indra, born of the gods, the overlord. 

xxii. 3. The third day is yonder world in its abode, Varuna, the Jagati, 
the Saptada^a Stoma, the Vairupa Saman, the basis by Tanva; it has the 
following symbols in its verses : the past tense with the mention of the god 
in the last Pada — the past is what refers to what has happened — (the word) 
‘horse', (the word) ‘cow', (the word) ‘chariot', (the word) ‘go', (the word) 
‘stand', (the word) ‘end', the same ending, the lack of definite mention 
(of the deity), the same beginning. ‘ Yoke thou those best fit to invoke the 
gods' is the Ajya.^ They say ‘Seeing that the third day is the end, then 
why docs the Ajya contain (the word) “yoke"?' ‘By this day the gods 
went to the world of heaven ; yoked thither they went ; therefore (it con- 
tains “yoke")' should ho reply. It contains (the word) ‘chariot' in ‘The 
steeds, O Agni, like a charioteer ' ; this is a symbol of this day. It is in 
Gayatri, for this set of three days has the Gayatri at the morning pressing. 
So in the transposed form. Taking out that, ‘ Thou, O Agni, the Vasus here ' 
is used in the conjunct form.^ The explanation of this has been given. 
The Praliga is in Usnih verses by Atri ; ® the third day is connected with 
the Jagati ; in that the Praiiga is in Usnih verses by Atri for the third day, 
thus the Jagati enjoys the third pressing. 

xxii. 4. ‘ Three friendships hath man's worship ' is the Marutvatiya;^ (the 
word) ‘ three ' is a symbol of the third day. ‘ If a hundred skies, O Indra, 
were thine' is the strophe of the Vairupa there is repetition in ‘and 

8 RV. X. 92 (already cited in KB. xix. 9). * RV. i. 46 (already cited in KB. xx. 4) ; 55®* 

8 RV. vi. 8 (already cited in KB. xx. 8) and x. 4. 3. 

i. 64 (already in KB. xix. 9) ; 55®* ^* ^ ®®® 55®* ^* ^* ^ ^* 

16. xxii. 4. 1 RV. v. 29 (also cited in KB. xxvi. 16); 

RV. i. 68 ; 55®* ** ®* ^®* 55®* ^* ^* ®* The sense of tryaryamd is 

Because of i?r5<ar. parame vai tat^ Anand. doubtful. 

1 RV. viii. 75 ; 55 S. x. 4. 2. Of. AB. v. 1, 2. * RV. viii. 70. 6, 6 (also cited in KB. xxv. 6) ; 

55 s. X. 4. 9. 



[470 


xxii. 4 — ] 'The Soma Sacrifice 

a hundred earths also ’ ; the third day is the end ; having gone to the end, 
he repeats (as it were) ; for hence whitherward should he go ? ‘0 Indra, as 
many as thou ’ is the antistrophe ; ^ there is repetition in ‘ Day by day would 
I obey the mighty ' ; the third day is the end ; having gone to the end, he 
repeats as it were, for hence whitherward should he go ? ‘ O Indra, 

threefold protection ’ is the Pragatha of the Saraan,^ containing in ‘ three- 
fold ’ (the word) * three * ; this is a symbol of the third day. ‘ I was the 
first lord of wealth’ is (the hymn) to Indra;® in ‘I’ and ‘I’ it has the 
same beginning ; just as that which has the same ending, so that which has 
the same beginning is a symbol of the end. In the Tristubh (hymn), * He 
who is bom the first, the wise,’ he inserts aNivid.® That hymn is the body 
of Indra. ‘ Placing in it a Nivid, Grtsamada Bhargava"^ went to the dear 
abode of Indra ’ (they say). He goes to the dear abode of Indra, he conquers 
the other world, who places a Nivid in this hymn. It contains a symbol 
of ending in the reference to what has been ; ‘ He who in secret hath 
depressed the hostile colour ' is about what has been as it were. It has the 
same ending ; this is a second symbol of the end. 

xxii. 5. ‘ Towards thee, O god Savitr ’ is the antistrophe, ^ containing the 
word ‘ towards ’. They say ' In that the third day is the end, then why 
has the antistrophe (the word) towards ” ? ’ ‘ By this day the gods went 

to the world of heaven ; desiring towards it they went ; therefore (it has 
“ towards ”) ’ he should reply. ' Hitherward the god Savitr with the golden ’ 
and ‘ Rich in ghee, encompassing the worlds ’ are (two triplets containing 
(the word) ‘ ghee ’ ; the explanation of these has been given. ‘ Born, without 
steed, without reins, worthy of praise ’ is (the hymn) to the Rbhus ; ^ there is 
the word ' with three wheels ’ in ' The chariot of three wheels circleth round 
the atmosphere ’ ; this is a symbol of the third day. ‘ Those who from afar 
would assume kinship’ is (the hymn) to the All-gods;^ (it contains the 
word) ‘from afar’; from afar is the end; the third day is the end; in the 
end he places the end. These hymns end in half-verses, some in Padas, 
some in half-Padas ; this ends with a third of a Pada ; this is a symbol of 
the third day. ‘To Vai 9 vanara the praise, increasing holy order’ is (the 


3 RV. vi. 32. 18, 19; 99s. x. 4. 9. 

^ RV. vi. 46. 9 ; 99S. x. 4. 10. 

3 RV. X. 48 (also cited 111 KB. xxvi. 16) ; 95®* 
X. 4. 11. 

• RV. ii. 12 (already cited in KB. xxi. 4); 

99s. X. 4. 11. 

M^s rt^ading Bdbhravahsiml so the Anand. ed. 

* RV. i. 24. 3-5 (already cited in KB. viii. 1) ; 

99s. X. 4. 13. 


* RV. vi. 71 (already cited in KB. viii. 7 ; xx. 

4 ; xxi. 3) and 70 (already in xxi. 3). The 
whole hymn is not meant, but only three 
verses as in 99^* case. 

But * hymn ’ is regularly applied to such 
cases in the Brahma nas. 

3 RV. iv. 86 (already in KB. xxi. 2) ; 99S. x. 
4. 14. 

* RV. X. 63 ; 99s. X. 4. 14. 



471 ] 


The Pr§thya Sadaha [ — xxii. 7 

hymn) to Vai 9 vanara,® containing (the word) 'ghee' in 'Like pure ghee to 
Agni we accord ' ; the explanation of this has been given. ‘ Kich in showers, 
the Maruts, of daring might ' is (the hymn) to the Maruts ; ® in ‘ Rich in 
showers ' there is repetition ; the third day is the end ; having gone to the 
end, he repeats as it were, for hence whitherward should he go ? ' Thou 

O Agni, the first Angiras, the Rsi,' is (the hymn) to Jatavedas;*^ it has the 
same beginning in ‘thou* and ‘thou’; just as that which has the same 
ending, so that which has the same beginning is a symbol of the end. 
Yonder world with the third day they obtain, the Jagati metre, the Sapta- 
da^a Stoma, the Vairupa Saman, the western quarter, the rains of the 
seasons, the Adityas the gods, Varuna, born of the gods, the overlord. 

xxii. 6. The third day is the end ; the gods having gone to the end desired 
the fourth day ; therefore it contains (the word) ‘ desire * ; having sacrificed 
they found it ; therefore it contains (the word) ‘ yoke They say ' Since 
the third day is the end, then why on the fourth day does he insert 
the sound o?* The fourth day is the abode of speech; the Viraj is 
food ; the sound o is food ; verily thus he places food in the sacrifice and 
in the sacrificers. Moreover by the third day is speech obtained ; verily 
thus on the fourth day he expands it ; this is as when one expands heated 
metal ; ^ this (serves) to expand speech. It has the following symbols in 
its verses, (the word) ' ruling *, (the word) ' self-ruling *, (the word) ' Viraj ', 
(the word) ' born *, (the word) ' aid ', (the word) ' delight (the word) ' around ', 
(the word) ‘ towards ', (the word) ‘ up to '. ' With offerings for ourselves 

Agni* is the Ajya^ by Vimada. By means of Vimada(*s hymn) the gods 
confused^ the Asuras; in that (the hymn of) Vimada is recited both in 
the middle and in the recitations of the Hotrakas, from each limb the 
sacrificers expel in confusion evil. It contains (the word) ' born ' in ' Agni 
brought to birth by Atharvan *; this is a symbol of this day. 

xxii. 7. They make up ten Jagati verses, for this set of three days has 
the Jagati at the morning pressing. They are twenty Gayatris, the 
Gayatri bears the morning pressing ; thus he departs not from the symbol 
of the morning pressing. So in the transposed form. Taking out that, 
^ Agni men with praise from the fire sticks * is used in the conjunct form.^ 
The Ajya is in Viraj metre; the Prstha is in \'iraj ; that is accordant. 


® KV. iii. 2 (alieady cited in KB. xix. 9) j 99®* 
X. 4. 16. 

® RV. ii. SI (already cited in KB. xxi. 4) ; 

99s. X. 4. 15. 

’ RV. i. 31 ; 99s. X. 4. 15. 

^ Piesumably yatfmjas is to be read, but 
yafhdyas is also pos.^ible. 


2 RV. X. 21 ; 99s. X. 6. 2. Cf. AB. v. 4, 6. 

2 timadan of OoBLK is perhaps a mere error ; 
it is found as vimadas in the Anand ed., 
possibly an error for vimedus, 
xxii. 7. ' RV. vii. 1 (also cited in KB. xxv. 11 ; 
xxvii. 1) ; 99®* 



xxii. 7 — ] 


The Soma Sacrifice 


[472 


The Ajya is by Vasistha; the Prstha is by Vasistha; that is accordant. 
It contains (the word) ‘ born ’ in ‘ By the movements of the hands they 
have made the famed one to be born ’ ; this is a symbol of this day. The 
Prauga*-* is in Anuatubh verses; the fourth day is connected with the 
Anustubh ; verily thus he makes it to succeed with its own metre. With 
‘Thee with the sacrifices we invoke’, which contains the word ‘sacrifice’, 
he begins the Marutvatlya ; ® the sacrifice has to be taken up again on the 
fourth day; verily thus he takes up again the sacrifice. ‘Hear our call, 
O Indra, harm us not ’ is the Marutvatiya.^ These Tristubh verses have 
a Viraj tinge ; they are employed here, for they are endowed with the 
symbol of the day. ‘ O Indra, with the Maruts here drink the Soma ’ 
is (a triplet) in normal Tristubh® and supports the pressing ; these in normal 
Tristubh that support the pressing do not depart from the midday 
(pressing). Indra is connected with the Tristubh and Indra has his abode 
in the midday pressing ; in that these in normal Tristubh which support 
the pressing do not depart from the midday (pressing) even with transposed 
metres, (it is because he thinks) ‘ Indra is connected with the Tristubh ; 
let me not cause Indra to depart from his own abode.’ ‘ When born the gods 
did adorn thee’ contains (the word) ‘born’; this is a symbol of this 
day. ‘ Him the cunning I invoke ’ is the Marutvatiya ; ® it is in Gayatri, for 
this set of three days has the Gayatri at the midday pressing. 

xxii. 8. Then (they ask) ‘Should he utter the sound o here or here?’ 
The sound o is intended for the strophe and the antistrophe and for 
(the verses) commencing litanies. That he should not trouble about ; the 
strophe is the body, the antistrophe offspring, the Viraj food, the sound 
o food ; verily he places food in the body and in offspring. ‘ The sound 
o as connected with the Anustubh should he utter ’ some say ; the fourth 
day is connected with the Anustubh ; verily thus he makes it successful 
with its own metre.^ ‘ The sound o as connected with the Viraj should 
he utter’ is the rule; the Viraj is food, the sound o food; verily thus he 
places food in the body and in oflTspring. At the middle Pada should 
he utter o ; the first Pada is the body, the last offspring, the middle Pada 
the middle, in the middle of the body is food placed ; it is as when one 
eats food, swallowing it piece by piece. ‘ Indra to the divine service ’ is the 
Pragatha of the Saman,^ by which Indra is attained; by it the gods 


* ggs. X. 6 . 3, 4. 

* RV. viii. 68. 10-12; x. 5. 6. 

< RV ii. 11 ; 55 s. X. 5. 8 . 

B RV. iii. 51. 7-9 ; ggS. x. 5. 8. 

« RV. viii. 76. 1-8 ; x. 5. 8. 

* The phrase vairdjanyuhkha occurs in xii. 

13. 4. For the mode see x. 5. 23 with 


Anartlya^s comm. The 0 is repeated 
twelve times after the second syllable of 
the middle Pada, the vowel of which it 
absorbs, every fourth being Pluti. Cf. 
AR. V. 3. 

2 RV. viii 3. 6 and 6 ; 99 S. x. 5. 18. 



473] 


[ — xxii, 9 


The Pr.fthya Sadaha 

attained all attainments ; verily thus also the sacrificers by it attain all 
attainments. ‘ Where is Indra famed, in what to-day ? * are the ‘ Where 
famed' verses;^ they are Viraj or Anustubh; they are employed here, 
for they are endowed with the symbol of the day. ‘ Of thee, the warrior, 
the bull, self-ruling * is in normal Tristubh* and supports the pressing ; the 
explanation of this has been given ; it contains in ‘ self-ruling ' (the word) 
‘self-ruling*; containing ‘ self-ruling * is a symbol of this (day). ‘Him of 
you, ever enduring* is the Niskevalya,® containing (the word) ‘hither* in 
‘ In all speech outstretched hither * ; that which contains (the word) 

‘ hither * is a symbol of the fourth day as introductor for the fourth day 
is a second introduction ; it is in Gayatrl, for this set of three days has the 
Gayatri at the midday pressing. 

xxii, 9. ‘ The golden handed for aid * is the antistrophe, ^ containing (the 
word) ‘ aid ’ ; it has (the word) ‘ aid * in ‘ for aid * ; containing (the word) 
‘aid* is a symbol of this (day). ‘Let the god Savitr with fair jewels 
come hither *, ‘ Forward the sky and earth with sacrifices, with homage *, 
‘ Forward to the Rblius like a messenger shall I speed my speech and 
‘Forward the bright, the divine, hymn* (are used); either ‘hither* or 
‘forward* is a symbol of introduction; therefore on the fourth day the 
hymns are recited containing (the words) ‘hither* and ‘forward*, for the 
fourth day is a second introduction. Verses of two Padas are recited; 
by having two feet one is able to ascend ; this is a symbol of ascent ; it is 
as if one having advanced should rest in the vicinity of the world of 
heaven. ‘Praise of the ruling, the Asura* is (the hymn) to Vai9vanara‘^ 
containing (the word) ‘ruling* in ‘of the ruling*; containing (the word) 
‘ ruling * is a symbol of this (day). ‘ Who are these men revealed together ? ’ 
is (the hymn) to the Maruts ; the explanation of this is that of the (hymn) * 
‘ Forward the bright.* ‘ For you I hail the glorious, the effulgent * is 
(the hymn) to Jatavedas;® the explanation of this is that of the Marut- 
vatiya. ‘Let the strong go forward, the flames with might* are three 
additional verses ® in the conjunct form. ‘ Hither for aid we come to the 
brilliant, the dread * contains (the word) ‘ hither * ; that which contains 
(the woid) * hither * is a symbol of this fourth day as introductory, for 
the fourth day is a second introduction. ‘ I praise him of valiant might 
like the bright one * is (the hymn) to Jatavedas ; containing (the word) 

3 RV. X. 22 ; 99 s. X. 6 . 20. » RV. vii. 6 ; 99 S. x 5. 24. 

4 RV. iii. 46 ; 99 S. x. 5. 20. * RV. vii. 56 ; pra^ukrJya is vii. 34 {ti, 2) ; 99 S. 

5 RV. viii. 92. 7-9 ; 99 s. x. 5. 20. x. 6. 24. 

1 RV. i. 22. 5-7 (also cited in KB. xxvi. 13 ; ® RV. li. 4 : 95®* 24. 

99 s. X. 6 . 22. 0 RV^ iii. 26. 4-6. The reading of LoK and 

® RV. vii. 45 ; vi. 58 ; iv. 33 ; and vii. 84 ; Anand. ed. aamitlha cannot be supported. 

99^. X. 5. 23. 7 RV. X. 122. 

60 [»* o s. 2fi] 



[474 


xxii. 9 — The Soma Sacrifice 

‘ hither ’ in ‘ Clothed in ghee further the way for the prayer hither ’ ; ® that 
which contains (the word) ‘hither’ is a symbol of the fourth day as 
introductory, for the fourth day is a second introduction. Having per- 
formed the litanies, having crept along, they perform the Soda 5 in; all 
this (universe) is sixteenfold ; verily (it serves) to obtain all this. Food 
with the fdurth day they obtain, the Anustubh metre, the Ekavih 9 a 
Stoma, the Vairaja Saman, the northern quarter, the autumn of seasons, 
the Sadhya and the Ajya gods,® Brhaspati and the moon, bom of the 
gods,*® the overlords. 


ADHYAYA XXIII 

The Soma Sacrifice {continued). 

The Prsthya Satfitha {continued). 

xxiii. I. The fifth day is cattle ; the basis by Tanva is the Pankti, the 
Pankti is cattle, (they say). It has the following symbols in its verses: 
(the word) ‘ bull ’, (the word) ‘ cow (the word) ‘ milk ’, (the word) ‘ ghee 
(the words) ‘ be drunk ’, (the word) ‘ wealth ’, (the word) ‘ strong ’, having an 
addition. ‘ This guest of yours, waking at dawn ’, is the Ajya,* containing 
(the word) ‘wealth’ in ‘wealths’ in ‘Wealths, 0 son of strength, among 
mortals ’ ; containing (tlie word) ‘ wealth ’ is a symbol of this (day) ; it 
has an addition ; this is a symbol of the Pankti ; it is in Jagati, for this 
set of three days has the morning pressing in Jagati. So in the transposed 
form. Having taken out this, ‘ Him I deem Agni who is bright ’ is used 
in the conjunct form.® It is in Pankti ; the fifth day is the Pankti ; these 
are the fifth day. ‘ To whom the cows go home ’ (it contains) ; containing 
(the word) ‘ cow ’ is a symbol of this (day). The Praiiga is in Brhati ; ® 
the fifth day is cattle; cattle are connected with the Brhati; verily (it 
serves) to obtain cattle. The strophe of the Marutvatiya^ has (the word) 
‘ of the five peoples ’ in ‘ When with the folk of the five peoples ’ ; this is 
a symbol of the fifth day. ‘ Thus in the Soma, in the drink ’ is in Pankti ® 
and contains (the words) ‘ be drunk ’ ; the explanation of this has been given. 
‘ Thou art the helper of him who poureth oft'ering, with the strew spread ’ 

* RV. X. 122. 2 c. below KB. xxviii. 1, n. 8. 

® For these deities (clearly based on Sfidhyas) ^ RV. vi. 16 (also cited in KB, xxiii. 8) ; 55®* 
cf. 9®* f Levi, La doctrine du x, 6, 2. Cf. AB. v. 6. 

sacrificey p. 62. ^ RV. v. 6 ; 99 S. x. 6. 2-4. 

devajdte ia curious aa^jdtau seems necessary : ® For its composition see 99^. x. 6. 6 and 0. 

it may be neuter, but this is hardly * RV. viii. 63. 7-9 ; 99® 
likely ; an error is probable enough. Cf. ® RV. i. 80 ; 99®* ®* ^* 



475 ] 


[ — xxiii. 2 


The Prsthya Sadaha 

are verses of six Padas ; the year has six seasons ; verily (they serve) to 
obtain the year. ‘They are to be recited as Gayatri verses’, Kausitaki 
used to say; the reciting as Gayatri makes full completion;® in that 
with each set of eight syllables he says the Pranava, that is the Gayatri 
form, ‘ Indra with the Maruts, the bull, for joy ’ is in normal Tristubh 
and supports the pressing.*^ The explanation of this has been given. It 
contains (the word) ‘ bull’ in ‘The bull, for joy’ ; this is a symbol of this 
day. ‘ He by whom this ’ is the Marutvatiya ; ® it is in Gayatri, for this 
set of three days has the Gayatri at the midday pressing. 

xxiii. 2. The Mahanamnis^ are the Prstha; by the Mahanamnis Indra sIqw 
V rtra; him having slain Vrtra the gods met as he went; before they had 
retreated away from him and stood in terror. Him Prajapati asked, ‘ Hast 
thou been able to slay?’ ‘Yes, yes’ he replied, without mention (of his 
name), for Prajapati is he whose (name) is not mentioned ; this is a symbol 
of Prajapati. Him Agni asked, ‘Hast thou been able to slay?’ ‘Yes, 
O Agni ’ he replied. Him his own greatness asked, ‘ Hast thou been able 
to slay ? ’ Before it had retreated from him and stood in terror. ‘ Yes, 
O Indra ’ he replied. Him Pusan asked, ‘ Hast thou been able to slay ? ’ 
‘Yes, O Pusan* he replied. Him the All-gods asked, ‘Hast thou been 
able to slay ? * ‘ Yes, O All-gods’ he replied. These five Padas are recited 

as ‘ mortar * ; it is the boundary of the Rc ; they are the strong ones ; by 
them Indra had strength to slay Vrtra; in that by them he had strength 
to slay Vrtra, therefore are they the strong ones, for they are strengths. 
‘ To him athirst ’, ‘ Who is most wealthy, O wealthy one ’ and ‘ Him for 
you who injureth not ’ are three sets of three verses ; ^ he makes as tenth 
the Brhati® ‘To him, to him of the drink.’ ‘Yea, thou art the powerful’ 
is, however, the rule,^ having the same utterance as the ‘mortar’ (verses) ; 
so it becomes eciual with or even superior to the strophe. ‘Whether, 

0 Indra, among the tribes of Nahus ’ is the Pragatha of the Saman ; ® ‘ Or 
of the five folks * contains (the word) ‘ five ’ ; this is a symbol of the fifth 
day. It contains (the words) ‘ be drunk * in ‘ Indra hath waxed to be 
drunk ’ ; it is in Pafikti ; the explanation of this has been given. ‘ Thou 
hast furthered our prayer in the overcoming of Vrtra’ are verses of six 
Padas ; ® the explanation of them has been given. ‘ Thou hast become the 

® M’s reading atisamrddliam is good sense but Scheftelowitz, ZDMG. lix. 423, 424. 

is probably a gloss. * RV. vi. 42. 1-3 (also cited in KB. xxviii. 7) ; 

7 RV. iii. 47 ; 6. 9. 44. 1-3 ; and 44. 4-6 ; 99 S. x. 6. 14. 

8 RV. viii. 76. 4-6 ; ^gS. x. 6. 9. s RV. vi. 42. 4 ; ggs. x. 6. 14. 

1 AA. iv ; ggS. X. 6. 10-13. Cf. AB. v. 7. < RV. viii. 92. 28 ; ggS. x. 6. 14 (i« va 

The KB. version of the Purlsapadas simply). 

seems to have differed from AA. by ® RV. vi. 46. 7, 8 ; ggS. x. 6. 15. 

omitting that to Visnu; cf. BD. viii. 102; 8 RV. viii. 37 ; ggS. x, 6. 16. 



xxiii. 2 — 1 The Soma Sacrijiee [476 

only wealth-lord of wealth’ is in normal Tristubh^ and supports the 
pressing; the explanation of this has been given. In ‘wealth-lord of 
wealth ’ it contains (the word) ‘ wealth ’ ; containing (the word) ‘ wealth ’ 
is a .symbol of this (day) ; it contains an addition ; this is a symbol of the 
Pahkti. ‘ Him Indra we strengthen ’ is the Niskevalya ® containing (the 
word) ‘bull’ in ‘ May he become a strong bull’; this is a symbol of this 
day. It is in Gayatri, for this set of three days has the Gayatrl at the 
midday pressing. 

xxiii. 3. ‘That desirable of Savitr’ is the antistrophe ^ by Vi^vamilra, to 
secure variety of the Prsthyas. ‘ Strengthening by their thought ’ * contains 
(the word) ‘ strength ’ ; this is a symbol of this day. ‘ Up the god Savitr of 
the home’ is (the hymn) to Savitr,® containing (the word) ‘cattle’ in 
‘ prosperity ’ in ‘ Prosperity to-day, O Savitr, prosperity also to-morrow ’ ; 
containing (the word) ‘cattle’ is a symbol of this (day). ‘The great ones, 
sky and earth, here the eldest ’ is (the hymn) to sky and earth,^ containing 
(the word) ‘ cattle ’ in ‘ steer ’ in ‘ Rousing the steer, in far-reaching courses ’ ; 
containing (the word) ‘cattle’ is a symbol of this day. ‘To us Rbhu, 
Vibhvan, Vaja, Indra’ is (the hymn) to the Rbhus,® containing (the word) 

‘ cattle ’ in ‘ possessing cows ’ in ‘ Who that which possesseth cows, strength, 
of good heroes ’ ; containing (the word) ‘ cattle ’ is a symbol of this (day). 
‘ Who now, O Mitra and Varuna, pious one ’ is (the hymn) for the All-gods,® 
containing (the word) ‘ cattle ’ in ‘ for bestowing of cattle ’ in ‘ To the pious 
strength as it were for the bestowing of cattle’; containing (the word) 
‘ cattle ’ is a symbol of this (day). It contains an addition ; this is a symbol 
of the Pankti. ‘ The swelling oblation, unaging, in the finder of light ’ is 
(the hymn) to Vai 9 vanara '' ; ‘ swelling ’ is a symbol of the fifth day. ‘ Even 
to the wise let it be a wondrous thing’ is (the hymn) to the Maruts,® 
containing (the word) ‘ cattle ’ in ‘ cow ’ in ‘ That owneth the common name 
of cow’; containing (the word) ‘cattle’ is a symbol of this (day). ‘Agni 
is the Hotr, the householder, the king’ is (the hymn) to Jatavedas,® con- 
taining (the word) ‘ strength ’ in ‘ Help us, O bountiful one, in the winning 
of strength ’ ; this is a symbol of this day. It contains an addition ; this is 
a symbol of the Pankti. So in the transposed form. In the conjunct form, 
‘The head of the sky, the messenger of the earth’ is (the hymn) to 


^ RV. vi. 31 (also cited in KB. xxv. 8) ; 99^. 
X. 6. 16. 

8 RV. viii. 93. 7-9 ; 99s. x. 6. 16. 

1 RV. iii. 62 10-12; 99S. x. 6. 18. Cf. AB. 

V. 8. 

2 RV. iii. 62. 12 c. 

3 RV. vi. 71. 4-6 ; 99S, x. 6. IS. 


^ RV. iv. 60. 1-1 ; see 99S. x. 6. 18. 
8 RV. iv. 34 ; 99S. x. 6. 18. 

6 RV. V. 41 ; 99s. X. 6 . 18. 

7 RV. X. 88 ; 99s. X. 6. 12. 

8 RV. vi. 66 ; 99s. X. 6. 19. 

0 AV. vi. 15. 13-15; 99S. x. G. 19. 



477] 


The Prspiya Sadaha [ — xxiii. 4 


Vai5vanara ; in ‘ The navel of the sacrifices, the seat of wealth * it contains 
(the word) ‘ wealth containing (the word) * wealth ’ is a symbol of the (day). 
‘ Hither the Budras with Indra in unison ’ is (the hymn) to the Maruts,'^ 
containing (the word) * cattle * in ‘ having cars and having heroes’ in ‘Having 
cows, having horses, having cars, and of good heroes ’ ; containing (the word) 
‘ cattle ’ is a symbol of this day. ‘ This guest of yours waking at dawn ’ is 
(the hymn) to Jatavedas ; the explanation of this has been given. Cattle 
with the fifth day they obtain, the Pahkti metre, the Trinava Stoma, the 
Qakvara Saman, the zenith^® quarter, the winter of seasons, the Maruts the 
gods, Rudra, bom of the gods, the overlord. 

xxiii. 4. The fifth day is cattle ; the sixth day is man ; Prajapati is man, 
being before all this (universe). Prajapati is beyond the normal metres ; 
this is a symbol of Prajapati. An Asura woman approached ^ Indra making 
musJcas at every joint ; Indra. desirous of subduing her, at every joint made 
^epas ; Indra indeed is Parucchepa (‘ having in joints cepaa ’) ; all does Indra 
seek to conquer. With her he had union ; with him was she angry ^ with 
the cunning of the Asuras ; he saw these (verses) with repeated Padas ; with 
them from every limb, from every joint, from all evil was he set free. In that 
the Parucchepa (text) is recited, in the middle and in the recitations of the 
Hotrakas, the sacrificers are set free from every limb, from evt^ry joint, 
from all evil. Placing first the normal offering verses, they use the (verses) 
of Parucchepa as offering verses ; in that on this day they do not say vamt 
with them, thereby are they left out; in that they do not omit^ them, (it is 
because they think) ‘ Let us not omit the unfailing part of the sacrifice, 
what is dear to the gods.’ Having performed first the normal seasonal offering 
(verses), they use (verses) of Grtsamada as offering verses ^ ; in that on this 
day they do not say vamt with them, thereby are they left out ; in that they 
do not omit them, (it is because they think) ‘Let us not omit the unfailing 
part of the sacrifice, what is dear to the gods.’ Thereby they become above 
the normal metre; thus with (verses) of seven Padas they perform the 
vasat call. Now as to this Kausitaki used to say,® ‘The metres with the 


10 RV. vi. 7 ; ggs. x. 6. 26. 

RV. V. 67 (already cited in KB. xx. 4) ; 
99 s. X. 6 . 20. 

12 RV. vi. 16 (also cited in KB. xxiii. 1) ; 
vv. 1-9 are meant ; see t??®* 6 . 20. 

M has urdhvdm, 

1 For the praiyutkramata of BLK and the 

Anand. ed. cf. in KB. xxii. 6 the v, /. 
vimadan of the same MSS. and Oo. For 
the story here cf. AB. v. 10, 11. 

2 ahrndt is very uncertain in benso ; possibly 

‘charmed him' may be meant. Thu 


Anand. ed. has arhandf^ v^hich is non- 
sense. 

2 The MSS. and tlie comm, recognize liere 
ndnfarayanti only. The veises for the 
different priests are given in 99®* 

2-6. BK and the Anand. ed. have 

utsrstvd, 

^ I. e. RV. ii. 86 and 87 give the offering 
verses for the offerings after the Praisas ; 
see 99 s. X. 7. 7. 

® It is clear from KB. xxiii. 6 that the rule of 
Kausitaki is rejected. 



xxiii. 4— ] The Soma Sacrijice [478 

Viraj as the eighth guard him who yonder gives heat. That concord they 
disturb who use (verses) over the normal metre as offering verses. 

xxiii. 5. Therefore assuredly they should use (the verses) of the one-day 
rite as offering verses, to prevent disturbance of the path that leads to the 
gods.' As to this Anicin Mauna asked the Jabala householders, having glided 
up to them when they were performing a sacrificial session, ‘ Have ye 
departed from the day, are ye Parucchepas 1 ' ^ Then were they silent ; then 
from the north half of the Sadas Citra Gau 9 rayani, or Gau 9 ra, made reply, 
‘ We have not indeed left the day; we are not Parucchepas ; in our litany 
the Parucchepa has already been added in the day^ (rite); with (the verses) 
for the one-day (rite) have we sacrificed ; therefore we have not departed 
from the day.* One after another should they say the offering verses ; the 
sixth day is an abode of the gods ; if on that day the Hotr alone should 
say vasat, the Hotr would commingle the abode of the gods of the Adhvaryu 
and the householder.^ A race they run for the world of heaven by the 
sixth day ; he who completes it witliout drawing in breath wins the world 
of heaven ; but, if he should draw in breath, let him ever and again pushing 
forward^ try (to complete it). 

xxiii. 6. * He is born in the ordinance of Manu * is the Ajya,^ with no 
deity mentioned by name in ‘he*; Prajapati is he (whose name is) not 
mentioned ; this is a symbol of Prajapati. They are beyond the normal 
metres, having seven Padas, and have repeated Padas ; in that it is this day, 
they are thus. He should not draw in breath between the Pada and the 
repeated Pada ; the Pada is the body, the repeated Pada the breaths ; if one 
should say of him who breathes in at this point, ‘ He has separated the body 
from the breath ; he will not live *, so would it be. Therefore he should not 
draw in breath between the Pada and the repeated Pada. The Praliga is 
in a metre beyond the normal ; the sixth day is connected with a metre 
beyond the normal ; verily thus he makes it successful with its own metre. 
‘ He first of the great * is the strophe of the Marutvatiya ^ ; in ‘ he * no deity 
is mentioned by name; Prajapati is he (whose name is) not mentioned; 
this is a symbol of Prajapati. ‘ The chariot which thou, O Indra, for the 

* ahno ^gdtd must be read to make sense. The BC and the Anand. ed. which has, like 

Anand. ed. has papracchanno gdfd. The OoC {ahar LBK), 'hndyattsvaikdhiklhhir, 

sense is perhaps literally * by having But nah (M, Burnell MS.) seems better. 

^epas at the joints’ ; a reference to the ^ This is explained by 99®* 0 and 10; 

addition of verses after the normal cf. AB. v. 9. 

offering versos. Parucchepdt in M is b, had * pratisdram may mean ‘recurring’ to the 

correction, like tasmdd vaikdhikibhify just work as BR. take it. 

above. xxiii 6. ^ RV. i. 128; cp. 95®* ** which 

* na might be read as in BK. and as suggested gives in 2 and 8 the Praiiga. Cf. AB. v. 12. 

by the obvious blunder gastrendhan in RV. viii. 63. 1-3 ; 99®* ^* ®* ^* 



479] The Prsthya Sadaha [ — xxiii. 8 

winning of the offering ’ is by Parucchepa ® ; the explanation of this has been 
given. In ‘ He who with heroes winneth the light ’ there is a reference to the 
Maruts in ‘ with heroes ‘ He who strong with the strong in one dwelling ’ 
is in normal Tristubh * and supports the pressing ; the explanation of this 
has been given. There is repetition in ‘ Strong with the strong ’ ; the sixth 
day is the end ; having gone to the end, he repeats as it were, for hence 
whitherward should he go 1 ‘ O Indra, generous, with the Maruts ’ is the 

Marutvatiya®; it is in Gayatrl, for this set of three days has the Gayatrl 
at the midday pressing. 

xxiii. 7. ‘ Rich be ours in joint carouse ’, and ‘ Rich the praiser of the 
rich’, thus^ the Varavantiya is imposed on the foundation of the Raivata. 
The Saman is addressed to Agni, with verses to Indra ; it makes a pairing, 
a symbol of generation. ‘Praise naught else’ is the Pragatha of the 
Saman ^ ; in ‘ O friends ’ in ‘ 0 friends, come not to harm ’ it is the symbol 
of all ; the sixth day is the symbol of all ; therefore in ‘ O friends ’ he 
refers to all. ‘ 0 Indra, come to us from afar ’ is by Parucchepa ® ; the 
explanation of this has been given. (It contains) ‘ from afar ’ ; from afar 
is the end ; the .sixth day is the end ; he places the end in the end. ‘ The 
greatnesses of this great one’ is the normal Tristubh support of the 
pressing * ; the explanation of this has been given. Thei’e is repetition in 
‘ The greatnesses of this great one ’ ; the sixth day is the end ; having gone 
to the end, he repeats as it were, for hence whitherward should he go? 
‘ With the bay steeds to our pressed (drink) ’ is the Niskevalya.® There is 
repetition in ‘ Come, O lord of the draughts, to us with the bay steeds ’ ; the 
sixth day is the end ; having gone to the end, he repeats as it were, for 
hence whitherward should he go? It is in Gayatrl, for this set of three 
days has the Gayatrl at the midday pressing. 

xxiii. 8. ‘ To the god Savitr in the bowls, the sage ’, with this (verse) in 
a metre beyond the normal he begins the Vai9vadeva^; the sixth day is 
connected with a metre beyond the normal ; the metre beyond the normal 
thus attains the third pressing. Moreover the sixth day is connected with 
Prajapati; Prajapati is beyond the normal metre; this is a symbol of 
Prajapati. The antistrophe contains (the word) ‘ towards ’ ; the explanation 
of this has been given. ‘ Up this god Savitr for instigation ’ is (the hymn) 


» EV. i. 129 : 99s. X. 8. 6. 

< EV. i. 100; 99s. X. 8. 6. 

0 EV. viii. 76. 7-9 ; 99S. x. 8. 6. 

1 RV. i. 80. 13-15 and viii. 2. 13-16. The 

verses of the Raivata are then sung to the 
Varavantiya Saman; 99®* 8. 7. Cf, 

AB. v. 12, 13. 


2 RV. viii. 1 and 2 ; ^gs. x. 8. 8. 

8 RV. i. 130 ; ggS. X. 8. 9. 

^ RV. ii. 16 ; ggs. x. 8. 9. 

6 RV. viii. 93. 81-33 ; ggs x. 8. 9. 
xxiii. 8. ^ For tlie text see ggS. v. 9. 7 ; x. 8. 10. 
^ It is taken from the third day, 99S. x. 8. 
13. 



[480 


xxiii. 8 — ] The Sonict Sctcvijicc 

to Savitr®; there is repetition in ‘Savitr for instigation’; the sixth day is 
the end ; having gone to the end, he repeats as it were ; for hence whither- 
ward should he go ? ‘ Which is the first, which the latter of these two ? ’ is 

(the hymn) to sky and earth * ; there is repetition in ‘ first ’ and ‘ latter ’ ; 
the sixth day is the end ; having gone to the end, he repeats as it were, for 
hence whitherward should he go? ‘Why hath the best, why hath the 
youngest come to us ?’ is (the hymn) to the Rbhus * ; there is repetition in 
‘ best’ and ‘youngest ’ ; the sixth day is the end ; having gone to the end, 
he repeats as it were, for hence whitherward should he go ? ‘ This dread 
thing be of glad speech ’ is (the hymn) to the All-gods ®, containing (the 
word) ‘ stand ’ in ‘ When making his parents, standing firm on liberality ’ ; 
this is a symbol of the end ; the sixth day is the end ; having gone to the 
end, he stands still as it were, for hence whitherward should he go? 
Having left over the last two (verses), he throws in (the hymn) to 
Narajaiisa,'' ‘Those who through the sacrifice are adorned with the fee.’ 
The hymn is the body, (the hymn) to Nara^ahsa is offspring and cattle ; 
verily thus in the middle in the body ho places both sets, offspring and cattle. 

‘ The dark day and the bright day ’ is (the hymn) to Vai^vanara ® ; there is 
repetition in ‘ and the bright day ’ ; the sixth day is the end ; having gone 
to the end, he repeats as it were, for hence whitherward should he go? 

‘ Forwai'd the Maruts, devoted, with gleaming lances ’ is (the hymn) to the 
Maruts ® ; in that it has the same endings it is a symbol of the end, ‘ This 
praise to Jatavedas who doth deserve it’ is (the hymn) to Jatavedas'®: in 
that it has the same endings it is a symbol of the end. ‘ Let us not be 
harmed ; let us not be harmed ’ at the end is a symbol of freedom from 
harm. The waters with the sixth day they obtain, the Atichandas metre, 
the Trayastrinfa Stoma, the Raivata Saman, the zenith quarter, the cool of 
the seasons, the All-gods, Prajapati, born of the gods, the overlord. 

ADHYAYA XXIV 

The Soma Sacrifice {continued). 

The Ahhijit. 

xxiv. 1. The ^ Abhijit (is explained). By the Abhijit the gods conquered 
these three worlds ; therefore has it three turns and four endings. With 

» RV. ii. 38 ; x. 8. U. ’ UV. x. 62 ; 99 s. x. 8. 14, 

< KV. i. 185 ; 99 S. x. 8. 14. « RV. vl. 9 ; 99 S. x. 8. 15. 

« RV. i. 161 (already cited in KB. xix. 9) ; ’ RV. v. 65 ; 99 S. x. 8. 15. 

99 s. X. 8. 14. *0 RV. i 94 ; 99 S, x. 8. 16. 

® RV. X. 61 : verse 1 is of doubtful sense ; * For the Abhijit see 99®* » A 9 S. viii. 

99 s. X. 8 . 14. 5. 1-9. The use of the nom. twice, which 



481]* The Ahhijit [ — xxiv. 2 

the Vifvajit they conquered these four quarters; therefore it has four 
turns and three endings. The Abhijit (is explained). By the Abhijit the 
gods conquered ; what was left unconquered clung on as it were ; that they 
conquered by the Vi^vajit ; the Vi^vajit is so called (because they said) ‘ All 
have we conquered/ The Abhijit and the Vifvajit are these two, Indra 
and Agni ; the Abhijit is Agni, for Agni conquered all this (universe) ; the 
Vi 5 vajit is Indra, for Indra conquered all this wholly. The Abhijit has 
both Samans and all the Stomas; therefore both sets of hymns, those 
connected with the Brhat and the Bathantara, are recited. The two hymns, ^ 
‘Forward to the god, Agni’ and ‘What is best, that to Agni’^ are its 
Ajya ; ‘ Forward ’ is a symbol of the Bathantara ; ‘ aloud ’ in ‘ Sing aloud, 
O thou of wide radiance ’ is (a symbol) of the Brhat. The two Praiigas of 
Madhuchandas and Grtsamada should he interweave ; having recited the 
Puroruc toVayu,then (he should insert) two triplets to Vayu; then, having 
recited the Puroruc to Indra and Vayu, two triplets to Indra and Vayu ; the 
Puroruc, then the two triplets, the Puroruc and then the two triplets ; thus 
should he interweave. This he should not regard ; he makes the triplets of 
Madhuchandas first, those of Grtsamada second. As to this they say ‘ Why 
should he interweave the two (Praiigas) ? This he should not regard ; the 
Praiiga being that of Madhuchandas only, he should put on (the triplet) to 
the All-gods of Grtsamada above (the triplet) to the All-gods of Madhu- 
chandas ^ ; there is one (hymn) with the Brhat character expressed. 

xxiv. 2. ‘ O ye All-gods, come hither ; hear this my call ; sit on this 
strew ^ (The word) “strew” is a symbol of the Brhat.’ Then (comes) 
(the triplet) to Sarasvati of Madhuchandas ^ ‘ Let him conclude with the last 
verse of it ; so let the morning pressing be in the one-day form ’ is the rule. 
The Abhijit is a one-day (rite) ; the one-day (rite) is a support ; verily 
(it serves) for support. ‘ Thee like a car for aid ’ is the strophe of the 
Marutvatiya^; ‘This drink, O bright one, is pressed ’ is the antistrophe*; 
this is the normal one-day form; the explanation of it has been given. 
‘ Thou hast been born dread for impetuous strength having recited this of 
Gauriviti ® first, he inserts a Nivid in the five- verse hymn of Brhati verses,^ 


is also in M, is odd : the reading hdnv iveva 
(not ivaiva as stated by Lindner) of M is 
clearly correct ; the Anand. ed. has ha nv 
ivaiva with OoBC. M has sasanje. 

2 RV. iii. 13 (already cited in KB. xx. 2); 

ggS. xi. 10. 2. 

3 RV. V. 25. 7-9 (already cited in KB. vii. 9) ; 

99s. xi. 10. 2. 

* RV. i. 3. 7-9. Of. 99 s. xi. 10. 3, 4, 6, for 
the different possibilities, which in xxiv. 

61 [h.os. 29] 


2 end in the acceptance of the one>day 
form after all. iti is omitted below. 

^ RV. ii. 41. 13-15 (also cited in KB. xxvi. 
17). 

2 RV. i. 3. 10-12. 

3 RV. viii. 68. 1-3 (also cited in KB. xv. 2). 

♦ RV. viii. 2. 1-3 (already cited in KB. xv. 2). 
® RV. X. 73 (already cited in KB. xv. 3). 

« RV. vi. 60 ; 99 s. xi. 10. 7. 



[482 


xxiv. 2 — ] The Soma Sacrijice 

‘ 0 Indra, drink ; for thee it hath been pressed for delight.’ ‘ I shall proclaim 
the manly deeds of Indra’, this of Hiranyastupa ^ having recited first, he 
inserts a Nivid in the hymn of nine Brhati verses,* ‘Thy nearest, thy 
furthest aid.’ So if the Prstha be the Rathantara. ‘ But, if it be the Brhat, 
having recited the two of Brhati verses first he should place Nivids in the 
two from the one-day (rite),’ (they say). ‘ The Niskevalya and the Marut- 
vatiya should be each of one hymn only ’ is the rule. ‘ Drink the Soma 
towards which, O dread one, thou hast penetrated ’ and ‘ Praise him who 
hath might to overcome’ are (two hymns ®) containing (the word) ‘towards’; 
this is the symbol of the Abhijit. ‘ The third pressing should follow the 
normal one-day (rite) ’ is the rule ; the Abhijit is a one-day (rite) ; the 
one-day (rite) is a support ; verily (it serves) for support. 


The Svarasdmana. 


xxiv. 3. Svarbhanu, an Asura, pierced with ' darkness the sun ; the 
Atris were fain to smite away its darkness ; they performed, before the 
Visuvant, this set of three days, with the Saptada(;a Stoma. They smote 
away the darkness in front of it ; that settled behind * ; they performed the 
same three-day (rite) after the Visuvant ; they smote away the darkness 
behind it. Those who perform, knowing thus, this three-day (rite) with 
the Saptada^a Stoma on both sides of the Visuvant, verily those sacrificers 
smite away evil from both worlds. They call them the Svarasamans ; by 
them the Atris rescued (apaapt'nvata) the sun from the darkness ; in that 
they rescued, therefore are they Svarasamans. This is declared in a Rc, 
xxiv. 4. ‘ The sun which Svarbhanu 

The Asura pierced with darkness, 

The Atris found it. 

None other could do so.’ 

By this the Svarasamans are mentioned. The Marutvatiyas have (the 
word) ‘ who ’ ; the Pragathas of the Niskevalyas have (the word) ‘ who ’. 
Prajapati is ‘ Who ’ ; the Svarasamans are Prajapati ; they have Anustubh 
Nivids inserted. The Anustubh is the waters; the Svarasamans are the waters, 
for all this (universe) is suri’ounded with the waters, for on both sides of 
yonder sun there are waters below and above. This is declared in a Rc, 


’’ RV. i. 82 (already cited in KB. xv. 4.) 

® RV. vi. 26 (already cited in KB. xxii. 2 ) ; 
998. xi. 10. 8. 

® RV. vi. 17, and vi. 18 (also cited in KB. xxv. 

6 ; xxvi. 9) ; 95®* ^^* 

* The legend of Svarbhanu is common ; see 
Macdonell, Vedic Mythology ^ pp. 145, 160. 


“ parastad seems meant, and is read in the 
Anand. ed., not purasidt as in Lindner’s 
text. Cf. AB. iv. 19. M has parastdd 
asldat ia etam . . . iasyoparistdt . . . vidvdnsam 
Mhhayato visuvantam uhhayamti and inserts 
after apajaghnuh and before tad ya the 
words tat parastdd asldat. 



The Svarasdmans 


[ — xxiv. 6 


483] 


xxiv. 5. ‘ The waters that stand above and below, 

In the realm of the sun/ ^ 

‘ 0 god, the mortal with sacrifice hither ’ is the Ajya ^ of the first Svara- 
saman (day), containing the word ‘ hither ' and connected with the Bath- 
antara. ‘ Great strength in the beam ’ is (the Ajya of the second, (con- 
taining the word) ‘ great and connected with the Brhat. ‘ O Agni, bring 
hither the most mighty ’ is (the Ajya) of the third, containing (the word) 
‘hither’, and connected with the Rathantara.^ The Praiiga of the first 
Svarasaman is by Madhuchandas, that of the second by Grtsamada, and 
that of the third in TJsnih verses by Atri ; the explanation of these has 
been given. The strophe and antistrophe of the Marutvatiyas, the verses to 
Brahmanaspati, follow the model of the three-day (rite) ; the explanation of 
them has been given. ‘ Where is this hero who hath seen Indra’1 is the 
Marutvatiya of the first Svarasaman, containing (the word) ‘ who ’ in 
‘where’. ‘With what array, of one age, of one home?’ is (the 
Marutvatiya ®) of the second, containing (the word) ‘ who ’ in ‘ what *. ‘ Let 
him sing the Saman springing forth as of a bird ’ is (the Marutvatiya ^) of 
the third, containing (the word) ‘ who ’ in ‘ work (ka-rniAx) ’ in ‘ Those works 
most welcome to him ’ ; Prajapati is ‘ Who ’ ; the Svarasamans are Prajapati. 
‘When thou wast born, O unequalled one’; on this strophe which has 
a Brhati as the third verse, some daily bring in the Svaras ; if they do so, 
the strophe and antistrophe and the inserted verse are the same.'^ ‘ What 
newest of praisersl’ is the Pragatha^^ containing (the word) ‘who’; the 
explanation of this has been given. 

xxiv. 6. Then the basis of the Rathantara (is recited). ‘ Which thou, 
O Indra, dost support’ is a couple of verses,^ to avoid isolation ; (it is used, 
thinking) ‘ Let not that Brhati have been recited by itself alone as it 
were ‘ O Indra, 0 generous one, to thee we have turned ’ is the normal 
Tristubh^ (triad) which supports the pressing; the explanation of this 
has been given. ‘That most effectual for aid (power) of them’ is the 


« RV. iii. 22. 3 c. 

RV. V. 17. 1-4; ggs. xi. 11. 7. 

^ RV. V. 16. 1-4 ; 99 s. xi. 11. 7. 

The hymn is RV. v. 10. 1-6 ; see 99^* 
11.7. rathantaram is probably aji error for 
rdthantaram as above, and the Anand. ed. 
actually has rdth°, 

RV. V. 30 (already cited in KB. xxi. 3) ; 
99^‘ xi* ii* ^* Praiigas see xi. 

11 . 8 . 

« RV. i. 165 ; 99 S. xi. 11, 9. 

^ RV. i. 173 ; 99 S. xi. 11. 9. 


^ RV. viii. 89. 6-7. hrhatitrfiye is essential as 
a compound. Cf. KB. xviii. 10. 

This must be the sense, that all these are to 
be the same for all days; 99®- xi. 11 
seq,, gives variants, but Anartiya recog- 
nizes the rule here as intended to have 
this sense. 

10 RV. viii. 3. 13, 14. 

xxiv 6. ^ RV. viii. 97. 2 and 3. The Anand. 
ed. has i^astva. They are Brhati verses and 
match the Brhati of the Stotriya ; 99^* 
xi. 12. 4. 

2 RV. vi. 44. 10-12 ; 99 S. xi. 12. 6. 



xxiv. 6 — ] The Soma Sacrifice [484 

Niskevalya in Anus^ubhs,“ containing (the word) ‘ hither ’ in < ‘ O Indra, do 
thou hither bear that power,’ and connected with the Rathantara. ‘ What 
hath not been wrought by him?’ is the Pragatha containing (the word) 

‘ who ’ ; the explanation of this has been given. 

xxiv. 7. Then the basis of the Brhat (is recited). ‘ They call thee, men, 
when (the juice) is pressed ’ is a couplet,^ to avoid isolation ; (it is used, 
thinking) ‘ Let not that Brhatl have been recited by itself alone as it were.’ 
‘ O Adhvaryu, O hero, to the mighty the pressed (juices) ’ is the normal 
Tristubh » (triplet) which supports the pressing ; the explanation of this has 
been given. ‘ The singers sing thee ’ is the Niskevalya ® in Anustubhs, 
containing (the word) ‘ up’ in ‘Up with a rod they have raised thee’, and 
connected with the Brhat. ‘ These thee, O thou of much light ’ is the Pra- 
gatha,^ conUining (the word) ‘ who (ka) ’ in kavurna in ‘ of pure hues 
(poivakoivarfidh) ’ ; the explanation of this has been given. 

xxiv. 8. Then the basis of the Rathantara (is recited), then that of the 
Bj’hat. ‘ Bounding as a wild elephant ' is a couplet,^ to avoid isolation ; (it is 
used, thinking) ‘ Let not that Brhati have been recited by itself alone as it 
were ’. ‘ This bowl with the drink for Indra ’ is the normal Tristubh (triplet) 
which supports the pressing ; the explanation of this has been given. ‘ Indra 
all have caused to grow ’ is the Niskevalya in Anustubhs,® containing (the 
word) ‘ towards ’ in ‘ Towards thee we sing our praise ’ ; this is a symbol of 
the Rathantara. They say * ‘ He should not place the Nivid in the Anustubh 
(hymns), he confuses the arrangement of metres at the midday (perfor- 
mance).’ Having recited the Anustubhs first for the obtaining of desire, he 
inserts a Nivid in the Tristubh (hymns) ; thus in due order is the Nivid 
inserted ; it being inserted in due order places them in due order in all the 
worlds and in all desires. ‘ Hither thy car with every boon, O dread one ’ ; 
(he inserts a Nivid) in (this hymn*), containing (the word) ‘hither’ and 
connected with the Rathantara on the first day. ‘ He hath drunk hence, 
most marvellous and up for us ’, (he inserts a Nivid) in (this hymn ') con- 
taining (the word) ‘ up ’, and connected with the Brhat on the second (day). 
‘ In thee from of old the songs have gone together, O Indra , (he inserts 
a Nivid) in (this hymn ’), containing (the word) ‘ go ’ and being a symbol of 
the end on the third (day). If the Prsthas are the Svaras the Saman 


BV. V. 86. 1-7 ; 99S. xi. 11. 12 ; 12. 6. 7 ; 6 
gives an alternative. 

< EV. viii. 66. 9 and 10; 99®- 
‘ EV. viii. 38. 2 and 8 ; 99S. xii. 12. 4. 

* EV. vi. 44. 13-16 ; 99S. xii. 12. 6. 

» EV. i. 10 : 99s. xii. 11. 12 ; 12. 6, 9 ; 6 gives 
an alternative. 

EV. viii. 8 and 4 ; 99S. xii. 11. 11. 


xxiv. a ‘ BV. viii. 88. 8 and 9 j 99S.xi.i2. 4. 
» EV. vi. 44. 16-18; 99S. xi. 12. 6. 

5 EV. i. 11 ; 99s. xi. 11. 12. 

* iti omitted as not rarely ; of. n. 8. 

» BV. vi. 87 ; 99S. xi. 11. 12. 

» BV. vi. 88 ; 99S. xi. 11. 12. 

» BV. vi. 84 : 99s. xi. 11. 12. 



The Svarasamans 


486] 


[ — XXV, 1 


chanters use the Brhat and the Rathantara in the Pavamanas, but, if the 
Prsthas are the Brhat and the Rathantara, then the Saman chanters use 
the Svaras in the Pavamanas. " But the Prathas should be the Svaras only,’ 
Kausitaki ® used to say ; ‘ for they are the Svarasamans ; by the Prsthas 
the gods have touched the world of heaven ; the Prsthas are the Svaras, for 
the touching of the world of heaven.’ 

xxiv. 9. The strophes (used) are those of the Vai^vadeva (litanies) of the 
first three days of the Prstha Sadaha in conjunct form. The third pressings 
with the antistrophes are the third pressings of the second three days. The 
Vaifvadeva (hymns) there are taken out and other crypto-Vai^vadevas,^ 
without mention (of the deities), connected with Prajapati, are inserted, 

‘ This drink to you, O swift to wrath,’ ‘ Him of old, aforetime, at all times, 
now,* and ‘What vessel here of those that are pious?* in place of (the 
hymn) of Nabhanedistha. There should, however, be used the open Vai?- 
vadevas, ‘ Agni, Indra, Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman ’ on the first day,^ contain- 
ing (the word) ‘ who * in ‘ Having established {s-ka-hhitm) the sky ’ ; ‘ I hail 
the gods of great fame for security ’ on the second,^ containing (the word) 

‘ who ’ in ‘ Light making (jyotiskrtahy ‘ Dawn and night (usdbd naktd) the 
great ones, of fair form ’ on the third ^ (fiay), containing (the word) ‘ who ’ in 
‘ night Prajapati is ‘ Who ’ ; the Svara-amans are Prajapati. They are 
made up as Agnistomas or Ukthyas ; ‘ As Agnistomas ’ (is) Paingya’s view ; 
they become possessed of splendour who perform Agnistomas. ‘ Let them 
be Ukthyas,’ Kausitaki used to say. The Ukthya is a successful form of 
sacrifice, for it has fifteen Stotras, fifteen (^astras ; they make thirty Stotras 
and Qastras ; it makes up the Viraj ; the Viraj is prosperity and proper food; 
(it serves) for the winning of the Viraj as prosperity and proper food. 


ADHYAYA XXV 


The Soma Sacrifice {contimied). 

The Vi§uvant 

XXV. 1. The ^ waters practised fervour ; after practising fervour they 


* iii is probably to be understood (cf, KB. x. 
3, n. 2) after sprttyai, which explains 
probably Svara and its connexion with 
Pi*stha ; only thus can asprksan as aorist 
be'easily explained. For Kausltaki's view 
see 9?S. xi. 11. 8. The other view gives 
the first a Rathantara in its Prstha, the 
second a Brhat, the third both. 

3 RV. i. 122 ; v. 44 ; i. 121 (the latter re- 
places RV. X. 61 (the N&bhftnedistha) ; 
see KB. xxiii. 8) ; 99^* 


* RV. X. 65; 99®' 12. 14 ; on the fourth 

day, 7. 10 ; KB. xxi. 2. 

5 RV. X. 66 ; 99 s. xi. 12. 16 ; on the fifth 
(second), 5. 6 ; KB. xx. 3. 

" RV. X. 36 ; 99 s. xi. 12. 17 ; on the sixth 
(third), 9. 10. 

XXV. 1. ' For the MahSdivftkIrtya and the 
Visuvant day in the middle of the year 
Sattra see AB. iv. 18>22. For the ritual 
see 99®' ^1' 1^ A 9 S. viii. 6. 



XXV. 1 — ] The Soma Sacrifice [486 

conceived ; thence was this sun born on the sixth month ; therefore on the 
sixth month the performers of a session perform the Divakirtya. It goes 
north for six months, then for six reversed ; therefore the performers go 
for six months forward, then for six months reversed. Without it are 
hunger and repeated death ; they conquer hunger and repeated death who 
perform the Visuvant day. It has these symbols in its verses : (the word) 
‘ sun (the word) ‘ blaze *, (the word) * light (the word) ‘ ornament (the 
word) ‘ shine (the word) ‘ delight *. ‘ From the ocean the wave rich in 
sweetness hath arisen ’ is the Ajya^ ; for from the ocean, from the waters 
he comes out. It contains (the word) ‘ sun ’ in ‘ Indra one, the sun one hath 
produced ’ ; this is a symbol of this day. These (verses) recited together 
make up twenty-one Anustubhs ; he who gives heat here is twenty -one fold ; 
thus he makes it successful with its own symbol. The Praiiga is in 
Tris^ubh ^ ; this is the middle of the days ; the Tristubh is the middle of 
metres. Thus he makes it successful with its own metre. 

XXV. 2. ‘ Were not they who were made great with homage?’ is (the 
triplet) to Vayu,^ containing (the word) ' sun ’ in ‘ They made bright the 
dawn with the sun ’ ; this is a symbol of this day. The succeeding triplet 
is addressed to Indra and Vayu,^ ‘ So far as the power of the body, so far as 
the might ^ with the symbol (of the day) in * So far as men with the eye may 
discern’. ‘Up the eye of you two, O Vanina, fair of aspect’ is (the 
triplet) to Indra and Varuna,^ containing (the word) ‘ sun ’ in ‘ The sun 
goeth extending of the pious one ’ ; this is a symbol of this day. ‘ Hither, 

0 Nasatyas, with chariot rich in cattle ’ is (the triplet) to the Alvins ^ ; the 
third (verse) contains (the word) ‘ blaze ’ in ‘ The god Savitr hath raised 
aloft the blaze ’ ; this is a symbol of this day. ‘ Come hither to us, O impetu- 
ous god, with might ’ is (the triplet) to Indra,® containing (the word) ‘ sun ’ 
in ' Heroes for life for the gaining of the sun ’ ® ; this is a symbol of this day. 
‘ Let the prayer go forward from the abode of holy order ’ is (the triplet) to 
the All-gods,^ containing (the word) ‘ sun ’ in ‘ The sun hath created the 
kine with his rays ’ ; this is a symbol of this day. ‘ May Sarasvati for us 
rejoicing’ is (the triplet) to Sarasvati,® with the symbol in ‘ 0 happy one, thou 
hast unbound the doors of holy order.’ This is the Praiiga of Vasistha 
arranged in triads of Tristubh verses, and containing (the word) ‘ sun 
Vasistha is Prajapati ; verily in Prajapati they succeed in all their desires. 

2 RV. iv. 58 ; g^S. xi. 13. 11. 59S. x. 9. 4 ; xi. 13. 14. 

® 95®" *'• 6'^®s U*® composition. ^ RV. vii. .SO. 1-3; (also cited in KB. xxvi. 8) ; 

1 RV. vii. 91. 1-8. Cf. 99 s. X. 10. 4 ; xi. 13. 13. 99S. x. 9. 4 ; xi. 18. 14. 

> RV. vii. 91. 4-6 ; 99 S. x. 10. 4. « RV. vii. 30. 2. 

3 RV. vii. 61. 1-3 ralso cited in KB. xxvi. 8) ; ’ RV. vii. 36. 1-8 ; 99 S. xi. 13. 16. 

99 s. X. 9. 4 ; xi. 18. 14. • RV. vii. 96. 4-6 (also cited in KB. xxvi. ll'i ; 

* RV. vii. 72. 1-3 (also cited in KB. xxvi. 8) ; 95®* ^ > *'• 1^* 



487] The Visuvant [ — xxv. 4 

XXV. 8. They ^ say ‘ The morning pressing should not be in Tristubh ; 
he disturbs the beginning of the sacrifice from its appointed metre ; let it 
be the one-day (form) only The one-day (rite) is light ; he who here 
gives heat is light ; verily thus they cause light to prosper with light. 
' Forward to the god, to Agni ’ and ‘ Thou hast glory of rule these two are 
the Ajya,^ These (verses) recited together make up twenty -one Anustubhs ; 
the explanation of these has been given. The Praiiga is by Madhuchandas ; 
the explanation of this has been given. ‘ Thee like a car for aid ’ is the 
strophe of the Marutvatiya ^ ; ‘This drink, O bright one, is pressed’ is 
the antistrophe ^ ; this is the normal one-day form ; the explanation of this 
has been given. ‘ With what array, of one age, of one home ? ’ is the 
Marutvatiya,^ with the symbol (of this day) in ‘ brightness * in ‘ array ’ 
{cuhhd). ‘ That ram that winneth the light I glorify ’ is in Jagati,® contain- 
ing (the word) ‘ sun ’ in ‘ Thou didst support the sun in the sky to see ’ ; this 
is a symbol of this day. ‘ Thou hast been bom dread for impetuous strength/ 
in this Tristubh (hymn ’^) he inserts a Nivid. (The hymn * has) the symbol 
(of this day) in ‘ Dispel the darkness, fill full our vision Two sets, Tris- 
tubhs and Jagatis, are recited, for the sun here gives heat, resting on the 
Tristubh and the Jagati ; thus openly they obtain it. 

xxv. 4. ‘ The Brhat should be the Prstha of this day ’ some hold, say- 
ing ‘ He who here gives heat is connected with the Brhat ; the Brhat gives 
heat ; moreover, the Mahadivakirtya is not a Prstha, the Brhat and Bathan- 
tara are openly Prsthas ; therefore the Brhat alone should be the Prstha of 
this day.’ If they should perform the Brhat on a Pragatha containing 
(the word) ‘ sun ’ and Pragathas containing ‘ sun (it is) with the symbol 
of this day.^ ‘ Indra hath knowledge for the hearing of this ’ is the be- 
ginning of the litany,-^ containing (the word) ‘ sun ’ in ‘ He is the lively 
pathmaker for the sun ’ ; this is the symbol of this day. ‘ The Mahadiva- 
kirtya alone should be the Prstha of this day ’ is the rule. The Mahadiva- 
kirtya is openly a Saman ; thus with its own Saman they make it success- 


^ As often the iti is omitted. This chapter 
gives an alternative view of the day ; 
99 s. xi. 18. 17. 

- RV. iii. 18 (already cited in KB. xx. 2) and 
vi. 2 (also in KB. xx. 8) ; 95S- xi- 13- IS. 
® RV. viii. 68. 1-8 (already cited in KB. xv. 
2 ). 

* RV. viii. 2. 1-8 (already cited in KB. xv. 2). 
® RV. i. 165 (already cited in KB. xix. 9) ; 
99 s. xi. 13. 20. 

« RV. i. 62 (also cited in KB. xxvi. 9) ; 99®* 
xi. 18. 20. 


RV. X. 73 (also cited in KB. xv. 3) ; 99®- 
xi. 13. 20. 

® In its last verse which as usual follows the 
Nivid, as the construction of the sentence 
shows. 

xxv, 4. ^ The apodosis is doubtless the follow- 
ing clause ; cf. 99®* ^i* ^ 1 

case here the recitation is RV. viii. 99. 3, 
4 ; 70. 5, 6 ; vi. 46. 3, 4 ; see 99 S. xi. 18. 
21, 22, 31. 

2 RV. X. 111. 3 ; 99 s. xi. 14. 8. 



XXV. 4 — J 


The Soma Sacrifice [488 

ful. Now some perform it on Tristubh verses ® ; he who here gives heat is 
connected with the Tristubh ; thus it with its own metre they make 
successful. ' Let it be performed on Brhatl verses ’ some say ; he who here 
gives heat is connected with the Brhati; thus with its own metre they 
make it successful. But the rule is ‘Let it be performed on Jagati 
verses ' ; he who here gives heat is connected with the Jagati ; thus with 
its own metre they make it successful. 

XXV. 5. ‘May the radiant one drink the great Soma-made mead ’ is the 
strophe triplet/ containing in ‘ All radiant, brilliant, great, the sun to see ’ 
(the words) ‘ apart {vi) \ ‘ radiance and ‘ sun ’ ; this is a symbol of this day. 

‘ The sun hath loosened apart his car in the middle of the sky ’ is the anti- 
strophe, ^ containing (the words) ‘ apart * and ‘ sun ’ ; the common metre is 
Jagati, but the rule ^ is (the triplet) to Surya, ‘ For all love thee, of one mind, 
one countenance with the symbol of the sun in ‘ Long living may we see, 
O sun \ ‘ Assuredly thou art great, O sun ’ is the Pragatha of the Saman,^ 

containing (the word) ‘ sun ' ; this is a symbol of this day. Here he recites 
the bases of the Brhat and the Rathantara ; ‘ Indra hath knowledge for the 
hearing of this ' is the beginning of the litany,^ containing (the word) ‘ sun ’ 
in ‘ He is the lively pathmaker for the sun ’ ; this is a symbol of this day, 
but the rule is (a verse®) to Surya, ‘Be favourable to us with thine eye, favour- 
able to us with the day containing the symbol of the sun in ‘ Give us, O sun, 
this wealth varied.’ ‘ Who alone is to be invoked by mortals ’ is (a hymn 
in Tristubh, with the symbol ‘ The divine atmosphere thou didst make to 
shine.’ So if they make the Mahadivakirtya the Prstha, but, if they 
perform the Brhat on its own basis, having recited the extension of the 
Brhat, he recites the basis of the Eathantara ® ‘ Indra hath knowledge for 
the hearing of this ’ is the beginning of the litany,® containing (the word) 
' sun ’ in ‘ He is the lively pathmaker for the sun ’ ; this is a symbol of 
this day. 

XXV. 6. ‘As the sky surpasseth the earth, O Indra, that which our 
foes ’ is (the hymn) ^ in Tristubh, containing (the word) ‘ sun ’ in ‘ Indra to 
Kutsa in the winning of the sun ’ ; this is a symbol of this day. If they do 
not (perform it) on its own basis, ‘ Turning as it were to the sun ’ is the 


3 For the alternatives see 9?^- 23 seq, 

Tliose rejected are RV. i. 115. 1-3. 4, 6 ; 
vii. 62. 1 and viii. 101. 11, 12; vii. 66, 
14, 15. 

1 RV. X. 170. 1-3 ; 99 S. xi. 18. 28. 

• RV. X. 138. 3-6 ; xi. 13. 28. 

3 RV. X. 87. 7-9 ; xi. 13. 29 (merely va), 
< KV. viii. 101. 11 ; 99 s. xi. 13. 80. 


5 RV. X. 111. 3 (already cited in KB. xxv. 4) ; 
99 s. xi. 14. 3. 

« RV. X. 37. 10 ; 99 S. xi. 14, 4. 

7 RV. vi. 22 ; 99 s. xi. 14. 6, 7. 

« See 99 s. xi. 18. 32. 

» See KB. xxv. 4. 

xxv. 6. > RV. vi. 30 (also cited in KB. xxvi. 
16) ; 99 s. xi. 14. 6. 



489] 


The Visuvant 


[ — XXV. 7 


strophe, 2 containing (the word) ‘ sun ’ ; this is a symbol of this day. ‘ If, 
O Indra, a hundred skies were thine * is the antistrophe, ^ containing (the 
word) ‘ sun ' in ‘ a thousand suns ' ; this is the symbol of this day. ^ Who 
most active, ever slayeth * is the Pragatha ^ of the Saman, containing (the 
word) ‘ sun ’ in ‘ In bodies, in the waters, the sun ' ; this is a symbol of this 
day. Then he recites the bases of the Brhat and the Bathantara. ‘ Indra 
hath knowledge for the hearing of this * is the beginning of the litany ; ® 
the explanation of this has been given. ‘ Who alone is to be invoked by 
mortals’ is (the hymn®) in Tristubh ; the explanation of this has been 
given. So now if they perform the Brhat on its own basis or on a different 
basis. If they perform without the two Samans, it is the same up to the 
beginning of the litany ; he should take out the bases of the Brhat and 
the Rathantara. ‘ Praise him who hath might to overcome ’ is (the 
hymn ^) in Tristubh, with the symbol in ‘ Increase with praises the bull of 
mortals.’ The next is the same. ‘The ram, much invoked, worthy of 
praise ’ is (the hymn in Jagati, containing (the word) ‘ sun ’ in ‘ Thou didst 
indeed mount the sun in heaven to see * ; this is a symbol of this day. 
Both sets, Tristubh and Jagati, are recited ; the sun here gives heat, resting 
established on the Tristubh and the Jagati ; thus it openly they touch. 

XXV. 7. ‘ I shall proclaim at the great assembly thy two bays ’, having 
recited nine verses of this (hymn ^) and having uttered the call, he inserts 
a Nivid. It contains (the word) ‘ sun ’ in ‘ Reveal to the bright one, the 
sun ’ ; ^ this is a symbol of this day. He then recites four verses of the 
‘ All-bay ’ hymn. ‘ May the true one come hither, the generous, he of 
the Soma lees ’ has twenty-one verses,® with the symbol (of this day) in 
‘ What time at the dawn they made to shine the great light.’ These make 
up twenty-five. ‘ To the all conquering, the booty conquering, the light 
conquering ’ is six Jagati verses,^ with the symbol (of this day) in ‘ To Indra 
the Soma, to him worthy of sacrifice the delightful.’ These make up thirty- 
one. In these Jagatis he performs the difficult mounting ; ® he who here 


2 RV. viii. 99. 3, 4 ; 99 S. xi. 13. 21. This 
explains above KB. xxv. 4. 

^ RV. viii. 70. 6, 6 (already cited in KB. xxii. 

4) ; 9?S. xi. 13. 22. 

< RV. Vi. 46. 3, 4 ; 99S. xi. 13. 31. 

^ RV. X, 113. 3; above KB. xxv. 4 and 5 ; 

xi. 14. 3. For the two bases, see 
ggS. xi. 13. 38. 

« RV. vi. 22 ; above KB. xxv. 5 ; ggS. xi. 
14. 6. 

’ RV. vi. 18 (already cited in KB. xxiv. 2) ; 
ggS. xi. 14. 8. 

RV. i. 51 (also cited in KB. xxvi. 9) ; 

02 [h.os, 25 ] 


xi. 14. 9. For the six alternative ways 
see Anartiya on 99^* 3ci. 14. 2. 

' RV. X. 96. 1-9 ; 99 S. xi. 14. 10. 

2 RV. X. 96. 11. He recites after the Nivid 

X. 96. 10-13, as usual with Nivids. 

3 RV. iv. 16; 99 s. xi. 16. 11. 

* RV. ii. 21. 1-6 (also cited in KB. xxvi. 16) ; 
993 . xi. 14. 12. 

® According to 95S. xi. 14. 12-14 the durohana 
is performed on RV. iv. 40. 5. Cf. AB. iv. 
20, 21. The sense of kevaJim sa dvefah is 
suggested by anavdnam in 99^* ^7 

kevabjn in AB. iv. 21. 3. 



XXV. 7 ] 


[490 


The Soma Sacrifice 

gives heat is connected with the Jagati, the difficult mounting is the sacri- 
ficers ; verily thus the sacrificers mount him. By Padas he mounts first ; 
thus they obtain this world ; by half verses for the second time ; thus they 
obtain the world of the atmosphere ; by three Padas for the third time ; 
thus they obtain yonder world; the entrance is by performance as one 
unit ; then by three Padas, by half verses, by Padas (he descends) ; thus he 
rests in this world, on a support immovable. This difficult mounting verse 
being recited together makes up seven. These are thirty-eight in all. 
‘ For his full oblations’, (these) are six (verses) in Jagati,® containing (the 
word) ‘ sun ’ in ‘ Indra it waiteth on as the sun on the dawn ’ ; this is a 
symbol of this day. These make up forty-four. ‘ The bird anointed by the 
craft of the Asura (these) are three (verses ’^), with the symbol (of this day) 
in ‘ This radiant sun-like prayer ’. These are forty-seven. With the con- 
cluding verse ® thrice repeated, ‘ Lead us to a wide space, wise one*, with the 
symbol (of this day) in ‘ The heaven, the light, freedom from danger *, they 
make up fifty. Those preceding are fifty-one ; they make up a hundred and 
one verses ; man has a hundred (years of life), a hundred forms, a hundred 
strengths, a hundred powers ; the hundred and first verse over is the world 
of the sacrificer ; thus here they make ready the sacrificers ; thus here having 
made ready the sacrificers at the beginning, he propagates them with the 
Mahavrata day. So the total as made up by Paingya.® 

XXV. 8. Then (the computation) of Kausitaki, It is the same up to the 
beginning of the litany. If one removes the Brhat and the Rathantara, the 
Rjujanitrlya ^ (is used) ; eleven (verses) of it (are used, if the Brhat is per- 
formed) on its own basis, nine otherwise, with the symbol (of this day) in 
‘ Now allotting the forms, now the works one goeth.’ ^ ‘ O Indra, come 

hither with thy bays (these) are fifteen verses,® with the symbol (of this 
day) in ‘ With those of fair form do thou come to us *. Having recited 
eleven (verses) of (the hymn of) Baru^ or of the ‘All-bay* hymn,® (he 
recites) a Nivid in the middle of the hundred and one verses; having 
recited fifty-one he recites the two (remaining verses) of the Baru (hymn) 
or of the ‘ All-bay * (hymn). ‘ May the true one come hithex’, the generous, 
lie of the Soma lees*, (these) are twenty-one verses.® These make up 

RV. i. 56. Lindner needlessly queries oWiamukhi- 

RV. X. 183 (already cited in KB. viii. 4) ; tjdya, 

55s. xi. 14. 17. 2 13^ 3 j sense is speculative ; see 

® RV. vi. 47. 8 (also cited in KB. xxv. 8 ; 59^- xi. 14. 22-24. 

xxix. 4) ; ggs. xi. 14. 6. 3 RV. viii. 34. 1-15 ; 99S. xi. 14. 25. 

99®* 1^* ^^* * I^V* X. 96 (cited by Pratlka in KB. xxv. 7); 

^ I. e. RV. ii. 18. The reading above 99®* xi. 14. 26. 

of M is needless, and its insertion of hayo- ^ rv. x, 96, a variant name from its content. 

da^arcam here is a sign of its tendency to ® RV. iv. 16 (already cited in KB. xxv. 7) ; 

interpolate, just as with Tdrksyah below. 99®* ^^* ^^* ^1* 



491] The Visuvant [ — xxv. 9 

twenty-three. ‘ To the all-conquering (these) are six verses.*^ These make 
up twenty-nine. The ‘ difficult mounting ’ verses are seven. These make 
up thirty-six. ‘ Thou art alone the lord of wealth * is a Tristubh (hymn) of 
five verses,® containing (the word) ‘ sun ’ in ‘ Thou didst destroy at the rising 
of the sun ' ; ® this is a symbol of this day. These make up forty-one. ‘ This 
strong one, god speeded (these) are three (verses),^” with the symbol (of 
this day) in ‘ As the sun with light, he hath stretched out the waters \ 
These make up forty-four. The bird (hymn '^) is three (verses) ; these 
make up forty-seven. * Lead us to wide space, wise one with this’con- 
cluding verse thrice repeated, they make up fifty ; the preceding are fifty- 
one. They make up a hundred and one verses ; the explanation of these 
has been given. 

xxv. 9. ‘ That of Savitr we choose ’ and ‘ To-day for us, O god Savitr * 
are the normal strophe and antistrophe ^ of the Vai 9 vadeva ; the explanation 
of these two has been given. ‘ They yoke their minds, they also yoke their 
thoughts' is (the hymn ^) to Savitr, containing (the word) ‘ sun * in ‘ Thou dost 
shine forth with the rays of the sun ’ ; this is a symbol of this day. ‘ They 
two, sky and earth, all weal producing * is (the hymn) to sky and earth,® con- 
taining (the word) ' sun ’ in ' The god, the bright sun, between the goddesses 
in accord with law ' ; this is a symbol of this dajT'. ‘ Why hath the best, 
the youngest come to us ? ’ is (the hymn) to the Rbhus ^ with the symbol (of 
the day) in ' He discerned ’ in ‘ What time he discerned the four beakers 
they had made.’ ^ I hail the gods of great fame, for security ' is (the hymn) 
for the All-gods,® containing (the words) ‘ sun ’ and ‘ light ’ in ‘ Those who 
obtained a share of the light of the sun ’ ; this is a symbol of this day. 
‘To Vai5vanara, the praise, increasing holy order* is (the hymn) for 
Vai 9 vanara,® containing (the words) ‘shining*, ‘radiance*, and ‘light* in 
‘ Shining with radiance, with light in greatness * ; this is a symbol of this 
day. ‘ Forward the Maruts, devoted, with gleaming lances * is (the hymn) to 
the Maruts,® containing (the word) ‘ sun ’ in ‘ The shining rays of the sun * ; 


’ RV. ii. 21 (already cited in KB. xxv. 7) j 
99 s. xi. 14. 12. 

« RV. vi. 31 (already cited in KB. xxiii. 2) ; 
95 s. xi. 14. 27. 

® RV. vi. 31. 3 : sense conjectural, da^a being 
unintelligible as it stands. 

10 RV. X. 178 ; 99 s. xi. 14. 28. 

RV. X. 177 : Lindner’s conjecture pa/awgam 
iti is quite needless in view of the frequent 
formation of names like patanga, seen also 
in 99 s. xi. 14. 28. 

' RV. V. 82. 1 (already cited in KB. xvi. 3) 
and 4 (already cited in KB. xix. 9) ; 99®* 


xi. 14. 30. 

* RV. V. 81 (already cited in KB. xx. 2) ; 

99 s. xi. 14. 30. 

3 RV. i. 160; 99 s. xi. 14. 31 ; x. 3. 14. 

* RV. i. 161 (already cited in KB. xix. 9) ; 99®- 

xi. 14. 32 ; x. 8. 18. 

* RV. X. 66 (already cited in KB. xx. 3) ; 99®- 

xi. 14. 33. 

* RV. iii. 2 (already cited in KB. xix. 9); 

99 s. xi. 14. 34 ; x. 4. 16. 

7 RV. iii. 2. 9. 

8 RV. V. 66 (already cited in KB. xxiii. 8) ; 

99s. xi. 14. 32 ; X. 8. 15. 



[492 


XXV. 9—] The Soma Sacrifice 

this is a symbol of this day. ‘ To him who sitteth on the altar, with a dear 
abode, of fair radiance ’ is (the hymn) to Jatavedas,^ with the symbol (of this 
day) in ‘ The light, the car, of bright hue destroying the darkness/ These 
are the hymns of the Agnimaruta (Qastra). These are the hymns of this 
day. It is an Agnistoma. The Agnistoma is light; he who here gives 
heat is light ; verily thus they make light successful with light ; immor- 
tality they obtain who perform the Visuvant day. 

XXV. 10. Before the setting of the sun should they seek to complete (the 
rite of) this day; the day has its morning litany, to be recited by day. 
They should seek to complete with this day including its morning litany 
and the offerings to the wives (with the gods) before the setting of the sun. 

‘ Agni, I deem father, Agni friend with this (verse ^) the Hotr begins the 
morning litany on this day, with the symbol of the ‘ rich waters ’ verse ^ in 
‘ friend {dpim) \ It contains (the word) ‘ sun * in ‘In the sky the bright, 
worthy of sacrifice, of the sun ' ; this is a symbol of this day. As to this 
Kausitaki used to say ,3 ‘The morning litany is Prajapati, and is not 
connected with the darkness ; verily in due order should he commence it : 
that is its prosperity ; so in due order are offered the Upan 9 U and the 
Antaryama (cups) ; that is their prosperity.’ The Apri hymn ^ is by 
Vasistha, containing (the word) ‘sun’ in ‘Overspread thyself with the rays 
of the sun * ; this is a symbol of this day. ‘ The Hotr for this day should 
be white, with red eyes ’ some say ; with this day they seek to obtain him 
who yonder gives heat ; this is as if one should approach a superior with 
a gift.^ But the rule is ‘Just as it may happen to be’. With the Qastra 
alone should he seek to produce the symbol of this day.^ A victim to the 
sun should be offered (in addition) to the usual victim for the pressing. It 
is oflTered inaudibly ; if a man should utter aloud (the recitation) for it, then 
if one were to say of him, ‘ He will become afllicted with skin disease, a 
leper ’ ^ it would be so. Four victims only are offered inaudibly ; that to 
the sun, that to Savitr, that to Prajapati, and that whose divinity is speech ; 
the others are offered aloud. Then they perform three Svarasaman (days) 
reversed ; the explanation of these has been given. 

® RV. i. 140; 99 s. xi. 14. 86. is a marvellous form, like 

1 RV. X. 7. 3-6 ; 99 S. xi. 13. 6 . above, and not necessary. 

2 RV. X. 30. 12 ; as in the normal form,99S. ’ kilasi is enough as in MK ; Mdtnt is simply 

vi. 3. 11. an obvious error, and kildsVi of Lindner 

^ The point seems to be that the observance is a mistaken conjecture, dhavisyasiti of 

of this order is the really important the Anand. ed., L, and the comm, is 

thing : tamasah or tamase may be meant. another easy blunder, but against the 

* RV. vii. 2 ; 95®* *i* 1^* regular usage of KB. It is most im- 

* dharan in having white and red, both sun probable that in kUdslt we can see the 

symbols. particle id: kildsd, a rare word, was 

* M has sampddayifyefy {mmpddayiseyufy), but it thought of as kila dmt. 



493] 


The Vigvajit 


[ — XXV. 12 


The Vigvajit. 

XXV. 11. They obtain this thirteenth month in that they perform the 
Vi5vajit; the thirteenth month is as great as the year; here verily the 
whole year is made up. Of it they say ‘ The six-day (rite) is the one-day 
(rite) for whatever is done each day in the six-day (rite) that is done on 
the one-day (rite), the Vigvajit. Much and varied is done on the Vi 5 vajit, 
in that all the Prsthas, and all the various Stomas are together put in it. 
Its Prstha is openly the Vairaja, the Rathantara at the midday Pavamana, 
the Brhat at the third Pavamana is performed, the Qakvara as the 
Maitravaruna’s, the Vairupa as the Brahmanacchahsin’s, the Raivata as the 
Achavaka’s. They obtain this thirteenth supernumerary month, for that is 
thirteenth," as they perform the Prsthas ; ‘ Agni men with praise from the 
fire sticks’ is the Ajya^ of this (day) in Viraj verses; the explanation 
of this has been given. The Praliga is by Madhuchandas ; the explanation 
of this has been given. ' Thee like a car for aid ’ is the strophe of the 
Marutvatiya ; ^ ‘This drink, O bright one, is pressed’ is the anti- 
strophe.^ This is the normal one-day form; the explanation of it has 
been given. ‘ With what array, of one age, of one home? is the Marutvatiya;^ 
the ‘What array’ hymn contains the word ‘who’; the Vi 9 \ajit as 
Prajapati is ‘ Who The strophe and antistrophe of the Vairaja are the 
strophe and antistrophe ; in them he inserts a repeated o just as yonder in 
the fourth day (rite) ;® for as it is in Viraj it is not the place to omit the 
repetition of o; then there is the inserted verse, then the Pragatha in 
which Indra is attained ; then he recites the bases of the Brhat and the 
Rathantara. ‘ That was the best in the worlds ’ is the Niskevalya ; the 
sacrifice is the best in the worlds ; the Vigvajit as Prajapati is the sacri- 
fice. Then, if® the third pressing of the sixth day is the third pressing, 
(it is because) the sixth day is connected with Prajapati, the Vi 9 vajit is 
Prajapati. The strophe is from the one-day (rite) ; the Vi 9 vajit is a one- 
day (rite) ; the one-day (rite) is a support ; verily (it serves) for support. 
The antistrophe contains the word ^ towards ’ ; the explanation of this has 
been given. 

XXV. 12. They say ‘ Why in the Vi 9 vajit with all the Stomas as a one- 


1 RV. vii. l (already cited in KB. xxii. 7) ; 
99 s. xi. 15. 2. 

* RV. viii. 68. 1-8 (already cited in KB. xv, 2). 
5 RV. viii. 2. 1-3 (already cited in KB. xv.2). 
^ RV. i. 165 (already cited in KB. xix. 9). 

® vigvajit i8 uncertain in sense ; it may be a 


noun and subject, or an adj. Gf. for the 
first interpretation 99^* 

^ See above KB. xxii. 8. 

7 RV. X. 120 (already cited in KB. xix. 9). 

* yadi is unnatural : yad would be adequate. 
XXV. 12. * I. e. as in AB. vi. 30, 31 the two 
Vi 9 vajits are distinguished. 



XXV. 12 — ] 


The Soma Sacrifice [494 

day rite are the Qilpas ^ recited at the third pressing ? Why (in it) as an 
Agnistoma at the midday pressing ? ’ The Qilpas are the lower breaths ; 
the sacrifice is man ; the morning pressing is the upper breaths ; the mid- 
day is the body ; the third pressing the lower ; these are the Qilpas ; there- 
fore the Qilpas are performed at the third pressing, for this is their abode. 
Then why are the Qilpas recited at the midday pressing in the Vi^vajit as 
an Agnistoma in a year-long sacrificial session ? The Ppsthas are the body ; 
the Qilpas are the breaths ; the breaths are not known without the body, 
nor without the breaths the body; assuredly the two are not severable. 
Therefore are the Qilpas recited at the midday pressing in the Vifvajit as 
an Agnistoma, (for they think) ‘ Let me not separate the body from the 
breaths.’ Moreover, the Vi9vajit is Prajapati; as Prajapati the Vi<fvajit^ 
is all ; therefore all the Prsthas are performed, all the Qilpas ; the Vi5vajit 
as Prajapati is all ; with all he obtains all he who knows thus. 

XXV. 18. In the Agnimaruta (Qastra) the Hotr having recited the Rudra 
verse, recites the Evayamarut hymn ^ in Pahkti form ; the sacrifice is five- 
fold ; verily (it serves) to obtain the sacrifice. ‘ Let me not/ (he thinks), 
‘ obstract the Qilpa of the Achavaka/ Moreover Rudra is the oldest and 
best of the gods, the Atichandas of metres, the Vifvajit of one-day rites. 
Thus he makes it successful with its own symbol. At three verses of it 
should he repeat o if he desire to repeat o ho should do it at all. The 
repetition of o is food ; the breaths are food ; the Qilpas are the breaths ; 
verily thus he places the breath in the breaths. Moreover by the Vi9vajit 
Prajapati propagated all offspring, and conquered all. Thus is it the 
Vi9vajit. Now is he born who sacrifices with the Vi9vajit; therefore does 
he repeat o. Stumbling ^ as it were does he move as he seeks to walk for 
the first time. Thus him from the immortal metre he propagates to 
immortality. They obtain immortality who perform the Vi9vajit. 

XXV. 14. The Vi9vajit of the year-long session is composed as an 
Agnistoma with all the Stomas and all the Prsthas; the Agnistoma is 
a support; verily (it serves) for support. If the Vi9vajit is a one-day 
(rite), or the middle day of a night session,^ it should be an Atiratra. The 
Atiratra is the complete Vi9vajit; half of the Vi9vajit is performed by 
day, half by night. The (Vi9vajit), which is performed apart from a case 


2 Tlie Qilpas are correctly given by 95®* 

8. 1 seq, in the Hotrakas* portion of his 
work. 

* See KB. xxv. 12, n. 6. 

' RV. V. 87 ; 99 s. xi. 15. 10. Cf. KB. xvi. 7. 
2 99®* *i* 1^* 11-18 gives these alternatives, as 
Jagatl without Nyuhkha, as Pahkti with 


or without, dr is unique, read perhaps 
dhriyeta. 

3 The term recurs in KB. xxv. 8 and is 
unique. 

xxv. 14. ^ See 99®* 18. 1, 2 for the ekdhaj 

and 14. 9 (A 9 S. xi. 6) for the Ratrisattras 
{12-24 days). 



[ XXV. 15 


496] The Vigvajit 

when all one’s property is given or a session, is one which brings all ruin. 
It is a loss of all if a man gives all ^ without a Vi^vajit. If there is 
a Vi^vajit (he should give) all ; if (he gives) all, it (should be) a Vi§vajit. 
‘If a man does not give all, saying Let me give all,” he prepares for himself 
a pitfall,® he comes to ruin,’ he used to say. ‘ Or a thousand makes this 
up,’ Kausitaki used to say, ‘ The thousand is all ; the Vifvajit is all ; by 
all may I obtain all,’ (so thinking he gives a thousand). 

XXV. 15. He should put round a calfskin ; bare as it were becomes the 
body of him who gives all. (He puts round thinking) ‘Cattle desire 
a calf; let cattle again desire me.’ He should dwell in an XJdumbara 
wood ; the XJdumbara is strength and proper food ; (verily it serves) to 
obtain strength and proper food. He should dwell with a Naisada ; the 
Naisada is the minimum of proper food; (verily it serves) to obtain the 
minimum of proper food. He should dwell with a Vai^ya; the Vai 9 ya 
prospers ; (verily it serves) to obtain the proper food which is with a Vai^ya. 
He should dwell with a Ksatriya ; the Ksatriya is the maximum of proper 
food ; (verily it serves) to obtain the maximum of proper food. He should 
dwell with a Brahman of the same family, to obtain the proper food which 
is with a Brahman of the same family. For a year should he wander, 
lying on the ground, accepting only uncultivated (fruits),^ not askliig for 
food, clothed in what is given. With that he clothes himself. ‘ Having- 
done this for twelve nights he may devote himself to another desire,’ 
Kausitaki used to say, ‘ the year has twelve months, this is an image of the 
year.’ The Ajya ((^astras) of the Hotrakas are addressed to Prajapati, as 
having no deity mentioned. The strophes ^ of this day (of these priests) are 
‘ Do ye two aid us to terrestrial,’ ‘ They yoke the tawny ruddy one,’ and 
‘ Them they ever praise ’ or ‘ Praise him who with his light.’ The strophes 
of the sixth day they should make the antistrophes ; the sixth day is 
connected with Prajapati ; the other five are Prajapati as the Vi 9 vajit 
the litanies they conclude® with the ending sets of verses; the ending 
verses are a support ; verily (they serve) for support. 

^ This seems the most reasonable sense if the period (Wackernagel, Altind, Gramm, ii. 

reading is correct. i. 78). For Naisada cf. Vedic hidex, i. 453. 

3 As above in KB. xvi. 9. ^ RV. v. 68. 3-6 ; i. 6. 1-3 ; vii. 94. 5-7 or vi. 

^ aphdlakrstdnf ca pratigrhnan is really ‘not 60. 10-12; see ^9^* 8-5, with 

accepting what grows on ploughed land Anartlya. 

a construction favoured in the Sutra- ® Road tad uktham with M. 



xxvi. I — 1 


[496 


The Soma Sacrijice 

ADHYAVA XXVI 

The Soma Sacrijice {continued) 

The Order of the. Gavdm Ayana. 

xxvi. 1. The first month has thirty-two (days), the last thirty-two; the 
Anus^ubh has thirty-two syllables; the Anustubh is speech; thus with 
speech they advance, in speech they conclude. There are two months of 
twenty-eight days on both sides of the Visuvant (day) ; the Usnih has 
twenty-eight syllables ; the neck is connected with the Usnih. Now the 
Visuvant is the head of the sacrifice ; verily thus having produced a neck 
they fit the head upon it. They say ‘ Of which of the two sets of days is 
it (the head), of the previous or the subsequent ? ’ ‘ Neither of the previous 

nor of the subsequent,’ they say.' Of both sets of days is it (the head) ; 
both sets of days are its. They say ‘ How many sets of six days are in 
the year ? ’ There are sixty six-day sets ; thus the course of the year by 
six-day seta is unbroken. Those who yoke thus the days of the year, 
they attain those de.sires which are in the year. Those who yoke them 
otherwise than that, they attain not those desires which are in the year. 
Now some perform the months in the forward order only, and the days in the 
forward order, (saying) ‘ We are mounting the year in the forward direction 
in both ways.’ ‘The months alone should be reversed, not the days,’ some 
(hold), saying ‘ The months are reversed in that this Prathya Sadaha comes 
round again from the back.’ Others say ‘ The Trivrt and the Trayastrin 9 a 
Stomas are characterized by being at a great distance ; it is as if from 
a mountain peak one should fall into a pit ; * that is a cleaving of the 
Stomas, therefore the days alone should be reversed, and not the months, to 
prevent cleaving of the Stomas.’ “ 

xxvi. 2. Then (follows) the discussion of the Oo and Ayus.' They should 

‘ See 99s. xiii. 19. 7 stq, A9S. xi. 7. 9 agree in inverting the days 

2 M has kartam and °ffkavdeva by liaplology. as well as the Sadahas ; in xi. 7. 19, how- 

^ stomakmtatdyai \\ill hardly do (cf. KB. ever, the two cases here given are men - 

xxviii. 4), as the normal dative of tioned. 

purpose is practically essential : perhaps xxvi. 2. ^ The Go and Ayus days precede the 
stoma? or asttma? (cf. AB. v. 16) should last ten days of the last month of the 

stand. The days are, of course, the Sattra. They form also the second and 

individual days (95S. xiii. 19. 12); the third days of the normal Abhiplava 

proximity is caused by a Prsthya being Sadaha ; see KB. xx. and xxi ; xi. 

now placed in the beginning of the 4. The order here is Ayus, then Go, 

second set of the months The first hence riArfe ; see 99^. xiii. 19. 1 6, which 

normal day of the Prsthya has the Trivrt does not note the variant here in favour 

and the sixth the TrayastriA^a ; see 99^. of the normal order as in A9S. xi. 7. 11. 

X. 2. 1 ; 7. 1. But 99^* 



[ — xxvi. 4 


497 ] The Go and Ayus Days 

perform the Go and Ayus as inverted ; the Go and Ayus are day and 
night ; day and night are inverted towards each other ; moreover the Go 
and Ayus are sky and earth ; sky and earth are inverted towards each 
other ; moreover the Go and Ayus are expiration and inspiration ; expiration 
and inspiration, being inverted, find support in each other.* Some perform 
them in the forward order, saying ‘The Go and Ayus should be performed 
in the forward direction ; the Abhiplava Stomas are reversed, and the 
Prathya Stomas in the ten-night (period).’ They say ‘ The Go and Ayus 
are the second and the third day.’ 

Expiations of Errors. 

xxvi. 3. Now ^ they discuss (this question), ‘ Supposing some one in 
carelessness makes a blunder in a ^astra or a recitation or if there is 
doubt, should one, thinking that the error has passed unnoticed*, 
mentally considering the (place of) occurrence, having gone back and 
remedied the error, proceed immediately from the (place of) occurrence (of 
the error) ? ’ Now Paingya used to say ‘ Superfluous would be a Mantra 
repeated twice when not prescribed; therefore he should not proceed 
immediately.’ So used Paingya to say. Now Kausitaki used to say 
‘ These rites in which the number of Mantras employed is limited have 
limited fruits. Those in which an unlimited number of Mantras is employed 
have unlimited fruits ; the unlimited is mind ; mind is Prajapati, Prajapati 
is the sacrifice ; the sacrifice rejoices in the sacrifice itself as mind in mind ; 
therefore should he proceed immediately,’ So used Kausitaki to say.® ‘ By 
the limited he conquers the limited, the unlimited by the unlimited; (it 
serves) for the winning of the unlimited ; in that there is no flaw ’, so used 
Kau.sitaki to say. He should not offer a libation. So the sacrificer obtains 
the worlds of heaven, all desires, all attainments, and all immortality, and 
acquires the pre-eminence, rule, and overlordship of all creatures, for whom 
it is done thus. 

xxvi. 4. ‘ Now if after the conclusion or after the Pranava or vasat call 
of the invitatory and offering verses, (an error) is perceived, by that time the 
flaw has been passed over Pragahi used to say. ‘ Therefore the priest in 

* The Anand. ed, has vikrte and pratyatisthata. the sense of necessity rather than imme- 

' There is no real parallel in AB. v. 82-34 diacy. 

which deals with the Brahman's part as * abuddham may refer to Uie case of vieikitsd 
correcting errors (cf. ggS. iii. 21), nor, and be a subject; or it may be object— 

what is more noteworthy, is there any ‘ passed uimoticed 

parallel in The exact sense of the ’ LK and the Anand. ed. insert Paiugyo Hha ha, 

passage is not certain as dnantarydtpra- smdhay which will not do. 

yogah is not unambiguous and may have xxvi 4. ' This sense seems required to explain 

03 [h.O*S. 26] 



[498 


xxvi. 4 — ] The Soma Sacrijice 

the Sadas should not call attention to a flaw passed over at this time 
Paingya used to say ; ‘ he knocks into a pillar or falls into a pit or is put 
into one or perishes *, he used to say. ‘ If the priest in the Sadas should 
call attention to a flaw passed over, there must not be repetition of what has 
been done,' Aruni used to say ; ‘ There is loss of a secondary element/ said 
Qvetaketu/^ ‘ Therefore the priest in the Sadas should not call attention 
to a flaw passed over/ Paingya used to say. ' It is a tribulation to the 
sacrifice if the priest in the Sadas calls attention to a flaw passed over 
‘ Therefore the priest in the Sadas should not call attention to a Haw passed 
over/ Paingya used to say/ 

xxvi. 5. Further he used to say ^ this. Daivodasi Pratardana having 
gone to a sacrificial season of the Naimisiyas and having glided up asked 
a question on this point of doubt, ‘ If the priest in the Sadas should call 
attention to a flaw passed over or any one of the priests should note it, how 
would you remove the flaw ?’ They were silent ; Alikayu Vacaspata was 
their Brahman priest ; he said ‘ I know that not ; but will ask Jatukarnya,^ 
the aged teacher of those formerly.' Him he asked, ‘ If the performer him- 
self should note a flaw passed over or another should call attention to it, 
how is that flaw to be made flawless ? By repetition of the Mantra or by 
an oblation V 'The Mantra should be recited again', Jatukarnya said. 
Him Alikayu again asked, 'Should one recite in full the (/astra or 
recitation or Nigada or oflering verse or whatever else it be ? ' 'So 
much as is erroneous only need be repeated, a verse, or half verse, or 
quarter verse, or word, or letter,' Jatukarnya replied. But Kausitaki 
used to say,^ ‘ He should not repeat the Mantra, nor offer a libation ; 
there is no flaw ', for, whatever flaw the Hotrs make in the sacrifice through 
inattention, all that Agni as divine Hotr makes flawless. This is declared 
in a Rc, 

xxvi. 6. ' If that in poverty of mind, with feeble intellect, 


the reason for neglecting the flaw, the view 
of Paingya. The alternative is to take the 
statement of PrAgahi as laying down the 
problem only, bhavatlti thus going with 
bydhyeta (which is of active sense). The 
comm, supplies prdyagcittdhutih. 

^ It is noteworthy that (^vetaketu appears in 
close contact with Jatukarnya in 99®* 
xvi. 29. 6, where his father and lie are 
mentioned, gumtlopa is late. 

^ LK. and the Anand. ed. add haika dhvs 
before iasmdtf and this is slightly better 
sense. The chapter, however, like KB. 
xxvi. 5, is probably confused in text. 


' Presumably Paingya\s view is meant, as 
at the end. For the Sadasya cf. 99®* 

1. 8 with comm. ; AGS. i. 23. 5 ; Weber, 
Tnd, Stvd. x. 144. The use of this priest 
is ondemned in 9^* 1^* 

* Jatukarnya appears in a similar light in 
99®* 1^^* 20* is mentioned in i. 2. 

17 ; iii. 16. 14. He became Purohita of 
the Ka 9 yas, Videhas, and Kausalyas, xvi. 
29. 5 ; he w.^s envied by 9vetakotu. For 
Pratardana see Vedic Index, ii. 29, 30. 

Cf. KB. xxvi. 2, where the correction is 
done, not merely manasd, as it seems, but 
also by actual repetition. 



499] 


The Chandomas 


[ — xxvi. 8 


Men think not of the sacrifice, 

Then Agni the Hotr skilled in the offering, well knowing, 

Most skilled to offer, to the gods shall offer in due season/ ^ 

In that also, when the sacrifice is completed, he says ‘The All-knower 
hath offered the sacrifice/^ he says ‘The All-knower hath offered this 
sacrifice/ In that he says ‘ Having sat down before us/ he says ‘ Agni, 
as divine Hotr, having sat down before the human Hotr sacrifices/ Verily 
with the second half verse or ^ the first verse lie utters a benediction. 

The Chandomas. 

xxvi. 7. On' the sixth day the gods ol)talned the Stomas and the 
months ; having obtained these Stomas they compressed these same Stomas 
in couples, being the Stomas of the Prathya, for whence could they have 
obtained another Stoma 1 The Trivrt and the Pancada^a Stomas becoming 
the Caturvinfa Stoma support the seventh day; the Saptada 9 a and the 
Trinava Stomas, becoming the Catu 9 catvarin 9 a Stoma, support the eighth 
day ; the Ekavin 9 a and the Trayastrin 9 a Stomas, becoming the Astacat- 
varin 9 a Stoma, support the ninth day. Of them the first is measured by the 
Gayatri, the second by the Tristubh, the third by the Jagati ; in that they 
are measured by the metres, therefore are they Chandomas. The six 
Stotriya verses which are over the Astacatvarin 9 a Stoma, these they call 
the seasons ; the seasons are six ; by these the tenth day is performed. 

xxvi. 8. The sixth day is the end ; the seventh day is a repeated 
extension (of the rite) ; therefore on the seventh day are recited hymns 
containing the word ‘ extend and with the symbols of the introductory 
(rite), for the seventh day is a second introduction, ‘ Forward to the pure 
radiance do ye bear ' is the Ajya,' containing (the word) ‘ forward ' ; that 
which contains (the word) ‘ forward ’ is a symbol of the first day. ‘ Forward 
to you, the pure, are offered boldly’ is (the triplet) to Vayu,^ containing 
(the word) ^ forward ’ ; that which contains ‘ forward ’ is a symbol of the first 
day. The next triplet is addressed to Mitra and Vayu,® ‘ They perceiving 
with true mind* ; it contains (the word) ‘yoke * in ‘ Yoked with their own 
insight they bear ’ ; that which contains (the word) ‘ yoke * is a symbol of the 
first day. " Up the eye of you two, O Varuna, fair of aspect ’ is (the triplet) 

1 RV. X. 2. 5. xxvi. 7. ^ For the Chandomas see AB. v. 16- 

* This and the next line occur in ritual see 99®* 

17 ; Ap9S. iii. 13. 1 ; K9S. ii. 2. 38, but xxvi. 8. ^ RV. vii. 4 (already cited in KB. 
not in this connexion, though in an xii. 7) : 99®* ^* ^* ^ 

> The Anand. ed. has cared. ^ RV. vii. 90. 1-3 ; see 99S. x. 9. 8, 4 for this 

analogous way. asman, a v. I, in O and and nn. 3-8. 

comm., is clearly right. 5 vii, 9 q^ 



[600 


XX vi. 8 — ] 


The Soma Sacrifice 


to Mitra and Varuna ^ ; containing (the word) ‘ extend ’ in ‘ The sun goefch, 
extending of the pious one * ; that which contains (the word) ‘ extend * is a 
symbol of the seventh day. ‘ Hither, O Nasatyas, with chariot rich in cattle’®, 
' Come hither to us, O impetuous god, with might/® ‘ Forward to you in the 
sacrifices the pious have sung,’ and ‘ Forward she hath come forth with 
fostering current ’ ® (are the other triplets) ; the symbols of the introductory 
(day) are (the words) ‘ hither ’ or ‘ forward ^ ; therefore on the seventh day 
are recited hymns containing (the words) ‘ hither ’ and ‘ forward ’ with 
the symbols of the introductory (day), for the seventh day is a second 
introduction. They say ‘ Whatever metre may be used in the morning 
pressing, the recitation of it is by half verses, with the symbol of the 
Qayatri, and thus moreover with the symbol of the morning pressing.’ But 
as to this Kausitaki used to say, ‘ The Tristubh and Jagati are not suitable 
to be recited ® by half verses ; even if they be employed at the morning 
pressing, they are to be recited by Padas only.’ So is the rule. The 
Prstha is the Brhat and the Qastra is connected with the Rathantara ; this 
is a pairing, a symbol of generation. The strophes and antistrophes of the 
Marutvatiyas and (the Pragathas) to Brahmanaspati are in accord with the 
form of the third day (rite) ; the explanation of these has been given. 

xxvi. 9. ‘ With what array, of one age, of one home ? ’ is the Marutva- 
tiya ^ ; that is called the ‘ prosperity hymn ’. With it Indra and the Maruts 
came to an accord. The pre-eminence of him who knows thus men accept. 
It contains (the word) ‘ hither ’ in * With what mind have they come hither, 
and whence? ’, and is connected with the Rathantara. ‘ That ram that winneth 
the light I glorify ’ is a Jagati,^ containing (the word) ‘ hither ’ in ' Hither 
Indra would I turn for aid with good oflferings ’, and is connected with the 
Rathantara. They say, ‘ Seeing that the Rathantara is normally the Prstha 
of the seventh day, then why is the Brhat performed daily ? ’ These days 
have great Stomas ; therefore daily is the Brhat performed, to confer equality 
of might on these days, to secure inequality of might of these Stomas.^ 
Having recited the extension of the Brhat he recites the basis of the 
Rathantara. ‘ Our father did not teach us any recitation ^ of the basis ; each 
stood alone ’, Kausitaki used to say, ‘ But whenever the Samans fall together 
on the same day then he should recite also the basis of the one or the other ’. 


* RV. vii. 61. 1-3 (already cited in KB. xxv. 2). 
® RV. vii. 72. 1-3 (already cited in KB. xxv. 2). 

• RV. vii. 30. 1-3 (already cited in KB. xxv. 2). 
’ RV. vii. 43. 1-3. 

« RV. vii. 95. 1-8 (also cited in KB. xxvi. 15). 
^ etatsihdne hardly means * in that place but 
is comparable with the use in AB. vi. 5. 
RV. i. 165 (already cited in KB. xix. 9); 


9gS. X. 9. 12. 

“ RV. i. 52 (already cited in KB. xxv. 3) ; 
95s. X. 9. 12. 

5 M has chandomdndmfhut this is not essentially 
required, asamabalatdyan is strange. 

* For the mode of anu^nsana see 95®* ^“* 
21. 1-5; X. 9. 14. The sense seems as 
given, but the text looks corrupt. 



501 ] 


The Chandomas 


[ — xxvi. 10 


‘ But, if they use the Rathantara of Kanva,® then he should not recite also 
the basis, for the basis of other Prsthas is not to be recited’, Kausitaki 
used to say. ‘ Praise him who hath might to overcome and ‘ Towards this 
ram much invoked, worthy of praise ’ are hymns ® in Tristubh and Jagati, 
both containing (the word) ‘ towards ’ : this is a symbol of the Rathantara. 
Two hymns each are recited in the Niskevalya and the Marutvatiya of the 
first Chandoma ; the sacrificer has two feet ; (they serve) for support. They 
make up four ; the Chandomas are cattle ; cattle are fourfold ; moreover, 
they are four-footed ; (they serve) for the obtaining of cattle. 

xxvi. 10. ‘ That desirable of Savitr ’ is (the triplet) to Savitr,^ containing 
(the word) ‘ forward ’ in ‘ May he forward our prayers ’ ; that which con- 
tains (the word) ‘ forward ’ is a symbol of the first day. ‘ Let the two come 
forward with weal for the sacrifice ’ is (the triplet) to sky and earth,* con- 
taining (the word) ‘ forward ’ ; that which contains (the word) ‘ forward ’ is 
a symbol of the first day. ‘ This to the race divine * is (the triplet) to the 
Rbhus,^ containing (the word) ‘ hither ’ in ‘ The hymn by the sages with their 
mouth (dsayd) ’ ; that which contains (the word) ‘hither' is a symbol of the 
first day. ‘ With straight leading for us, O Vanina' is a five- verse (hymn) 
to the All-gods,^ containing (the word) ‘ lead ' ; that which contains (the 
word) ‘lead' is a symbol of the seventh day. ‘Come hither with thy 
l)eauty ' is (a hymn) in verses of two Padas ^ ; it contains (the word) ‘ hither ' ; 
that which contains (the word) ‘ hither ' is a symbol of the first day* 
‘ Dread, supporting the people ' is (the hymn) to the All-gods,® containing 
(the word) ‘ hither ' in ‘ O ye All-gods, come hither ' ; that which contains 
(the word) ‘ hither ' is a symbol of the first day. It is in Gayatri, for this 
set of three days has the Gayatri at the third pressing. ‘ Vai 9 vanara to our 
aid' is (the hymn) to Vai 9 vanara;^ containing (the word) ‘hither' in 
‘ Hither, hither come forward from afar ' ; that which contains (the word) 
‘ hither ' is a symbol of the first day. ‘ Forward to you the Tristubh, food ' 
is (the hymn) to the Maruts,® containing (the word) ‘ forward ' ; that which 
contains (the word) ‘ forward ’ is a symbol of the first day. ‘ Singing, thee 
we invoke' is (the hymn) to Jatavedas,® containing (the words) ‘ extend' in 
‘ With thee they extend the sacrifice ' ; that which contains (the word) 

The Anand. ed. has absurdly yady uka eva. 3) ; 993* 

For the Kanvarathantara see Ind, Siitd, ® RV. i. 20. 1-8 ; 99®* 1®* 

iii. 212 ; Pb! xiv. 3. 16 ; xviii. 4. 7, 9. ♦ RV. i. 90. 1-5 ; 99 S. x. 9. 16. 

« RV. vi. 18 (already cited in KB. xxiv. 2) and » RV. x. 172 ; 99 S. x. 9. 16. 

i. 61 (already cited in KB. xxv. 6 ) ; 99 S. » RV. i. 3. 7-9 ; 99 S. x. 9. 16. 

X. 9. 13. 7 See 99 S. ii. 6 . 3 ; AV. vi. 35. 1 ; 99 S. x. 9. 

' RV. iii. 62. 10-12 (already cited in KB. 17. 

xxiii. 3) ; 99 S. x. 9. 16. * RV. viii. 7. 1-15 or 1-9 ( 99 S. x. 9. 17). 

» RV. ii. 41. 19-21 (already cited in KB. ix. » RV. v. 13 ; 99 S. x. 9. 17. 



jcxvi. 10 — ] 


[602 


The Soma Sacrifice 

‘ extend ’ is a symbol of the seventh day. It is in Gayatri, for this set of 
three days has the Gayatri at the third pressing. These are the hymns of 
the Agnimamta, These are the hymns of this day. It is an Ukthya. It 
obtains what the first day obtains. 

xxvi. 11. The first Chandoma is this world, the second the world of the 
atmosphere, the last yonder world ; therefore on the middle day are recited 
hymns containing (the word) ‘ great for the atmosphere is great. ‘ More- 
over, they should contain (the word) begun ” ; verily thus he refers 
to the next day, verily thus they keep taking hold of the next day 
Kausitaki used to say. ‘ Agni for you the god, in unison with the flames ’ is 
the Ajya ; ^ in ‘ When he hath stood out from the great enclosure * it contains 
(the word) ‘great* and also contains (the idea) ‘begun*. ‘Were not they 
who were made great with homage V is (the triplet) to Vayu,^ containing (the 
word) ‘ great * ; that which contains (the words) ‘ made great * contains (the 
word) ‘ great *, for this day contains (the word) ‘ great *. The following 
triplet ® is addressed to Indra and Vayu, ‘ So far as the power of the body, 
so far as the might *, containing (the idea) ‘ begun * in ' So far as men can 
discern with the eye.* ‘ To you two at the rising of the sun with hymns * is 
(the triplet) to Mitra and Varuna,*^ containing (the word) ‘ great * in ‘ I 
invoke Mitra, Varunaof pure strength *, and also (the idea) ‘ begun *. * From 
her sister dawn night doth retreat * is (the triplet) to the Alvins, containing 
(the word) ‘gi"eat*in ‘With great guerdon in horses, in cows, let us invoke 
you *, and also (the idea) ‘ begun *. ‘ This Soma hath been pressed for you, 
O Indra * is (the triplet) to Indra, ^ containing (the idea) ‘ begun * in ‘ O 
Brahman, O hero, rejoicing in the making of prayer.* ‘ Let the Brahmans, 
the Angirases, come forward ’ is (the triplet) to the All-gods,*^ containing the 
idea) ‘ begun * in ‘ Let the noise of the cloudy one have knowledge.* ‘ May 
Sarasvati for us rejoicing * is (the triplet) to Sarasvati * containing (the 
word) ‘ great * in ‘ make great * in ‘ Make great, O beauteous one, to thy 
praiser accord strength *, for this day contains (the word) ‘ great*. The Prstha 
is connected with the Rathantara, the (^astra with the Brhat; this is a 
pairing, a symbol of generation. 

xxvi. 12. ‘Great is Indra, manlike, spreading over mortals* is the first ^ 
of the Marutvatiyas in Tristubh, containing (the word) ‘ gi’eat *, for this day 

^ RV. vii. S : abhydrabdha is nowhere found as ® RV. vii. 71. 1-8. 

word, but only as an idea, 95®. x. 12. 2. • RV. vii. 29. 1-8. 

Read param evaitad as in KB. xxii 2. RV. vii. 42. 1-3. 

* RV. vii. 91. 1-8 (already cited in KB. xxv. * RV. vii. 95. 4-6 (already cited in KB. xxv. 

2) ; 99®* 10. 8, 4 for this and nn. 8-8. 2). 

* RV. vii. 91. 4-6 (already cited in KB. xxv. 2). xxvi. 12. ^ RV. vi. 19. 1-13 (already cited in 

* RV. vii. 66. 1-8. KB. xxi. 4) ; 99 S. x. 10 6. 



503] 


The Chandomas 


[xxvi. 13 


contains (the word) ‘ great ‘ These thee of many a poet ' is the second,* 
containing (the word) ‘ great * in ‘ Call thee that art to be invoked, O hero 
and also (the idea) ‘ begup *. ‘ Where is this hero, who hath seen Indra ? * is 
the third ® containing (the word) ‘ great ’ in ‘ Going with the bays on a fair 
chariot and also (the idea) ‘ begun ‘ Even from great, O Indra, thou those 
that approach ’ is the fourth,^ containing (the word) ‘ great ’ in ‘ Even from 
great misfortune thou art the protector *, and also (the idea) ‘ begun 
‘ Him sky and earth of one mind ’ is the fifth ^ in Jagati, containing (the 
word) ‘ great ' in ‘ What time he went revealing greatness and power \ and 
also (the idea) ‘ begun \ ‘ Thou art great, O Indra ; to thee the earth ’ is the 

first ® in Tristubh of the Niskevalyas, containing (the word) ‘ great for this 
day contains (the word) ‘great ‘Thou art great, O Indra, who by thy 
might’ is the second,*^ containing (the word) ‘great’ and also (the idea) 

‘ begun ’. ‘ Many not of old to him ’ is tlie third, ^ containing (the word) 

‘ great in ‘ To the great, the hero, impetuous, eager and also (the idea) 
‘ begun ’. ‘ This fame for thee, O bounteous one, through thy greatness ’ is 

the fourth,^ containing (the word) ‘ great ’ and (the idea) ‘ begun ’. ‘ This 

prayer to thee I ofler, the great one ’ is the fifth in Jagati,^® containing (the 
word) ‘great ’and (the idea) ‘ begun ’. Five hymns each are recited in 
the Niskevalya and the Marutvatiya in the middle Chandoma; the 
Chandomas are cattle ; cattle are fivefold ; verily (they serve) to obtain 
cattle. 

xxvi. J 3. ‘The golden handed for aid’ is (the hymn) to Savitr,^ containing 
(the idea) ‘ begun ’ in ‘ The son of the waters for aid ’. ‘ May the two great 

ones, sky and earth, for us’ is (the triplet) to sky and earth,* containing (the 
word) ‘ great ’, for this day contains (the word) ‘ great ’. ‘ Youthful the parents 
again ’ is (the triplet) to the Rbhus,^ containing (the idea) ‘ begun ’ in ‘ With 
Indra with the Maruts and the Adityas, the kings.’ ‘ The great aid of the 
gods ’ is a nine- verse (hymn) to the All-gods.^ In ‘ Favour be ours, O 
Aryaman, favour, O Varuna, to be celebrated ’, it contains (the word) ‘ great ’, 
and (the idea) ‘ begun ‘ These worlds let us subject ’ is a hymn in verses 
of two Padas,® containing (the idea) ‘ begun ’ in ‘ Indra and the All-gods 
‘ All-gods increasing holy order ’ is (the hymn) to the All-gods,® containing 


* KV. vi. 21 (already cited in KB. xx. 3); 
ggS. X. 10. 6. 

® RV. V. 80. 1~12 (already cited in KB. xxi. 3 ; 
ggs. X. 10. 6. 

< RV. i. 169 ; ggS. x. 10. 5. 
s RV. X. 118 ; ggS. X. 10. 5. 

® RV. iv. 17 ; ggS. x. 10. 6. 

^ RV. i. 68 ; ggS. X. 10. 6. 

« RV. vi. 82 ; ggS. X. 10. 6, 


® RV. X. 64 ; ggS. X. 10. 6. 

JO RV. i. 102 ; ggS. X. 10. 6. 

1 RV. i. 22. 6-8 ; see ggS. x. 10. 7. 

2 RV. i. 22. 13-15 (already cited in KB. xiii. 

1) ; ggs. V. 10. 7. 

* RV. i. 20. 4-6 ; ggS. x. 10. 7. 

^ RV. viii.83; ggs. x. 10. 7. 

6 RV. X. 167 ; ggS. X. 10. 7. 

« RV. vi. 62. 10-12 ; ggS. x. 10. 7. 



[604 


XX vi, 13 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

(the word) ‘ great ’ in the word ‘ increase for this day contains (the word) 
‘ great It is in Gayatri, for this set of three days has the Gayatri at the 
third pressing. ‘ Vai^vanara hath produced ’ is (the hymn) to Vai9vanara7 
containing (the word) ‘ great ’ in ‘ waxing great ’ in ‘ Waxing great with 
might on the earth for this day contains (the word) ‘ great ‘ What now, 

when as a dear ? ’ is (the hymn) to the Maruts,* containing (the idea) ‘ begun 
‘The messenger of you, of all knowledge’ is (the hymn) to Jatavedas.® Or 
‘ O Agni, be merciful ; thou art great ’, an eight-verse hymn for the eighth 
day,*® but the former is the rule. It contains (the word) ‘ great ’ in ‘ He great 
the recess of the sky’, for this day contains (the word) ‘great’. It is in 
Gayatri, for this set of three days has the Gayatri at the third pressing. 
These are the hymns of the Agnimaruta. These are the hymns of this day. 
It is an Ukthya. It obtains what the second day obtains. 

xxvi. 14. Going is the end ; so yonder sky, yonder world, and the ninth 
day ; therefore at the ninth day are recited hymns containing (the word) 
‘go’. ‘We have gone with great praise to the youngest’ and ‘Me, the 
strong, O Agni, of the Soma ’, these two (hymns) are the Ajya, containing 
(the word) ‘go’ in ‘ We have gone’ ; this is a symbol of the end ; the ninth 
day is the end ; he returns as it were, having gone to the end, for hence 
whitherward should he go ? It contains (the word) ‘ stand ’ in ‘ Here stand 
the cows, fattening’ ; this is a symbol of the end ; the ninth day is the end ; 
having gone to the end, he stands as it were, for hence whitherward should 
he go 1 ‘ “ We have gone with great praise to the youngest ”, this triplet 

alone should form the Ajya,’ * Paingya used to say. It contains (the word) 
‘ go ’ in ‘ We have gone ’ ; this is a symbol of the end ; the ninth day is the 
end ; he returns as it were, having gone to the end, for hence whitherward 
should he go ? ‘ How can a triplet make up the Astacatvaj'ih9a Stoma ? ’ 

Ka uy ta ki used to say. ‘ Me the strong, 0 Agni, of the Soma’® he should 
also recite ; this contains a symbol of ending in its reference to what has 
taken place ; ‘ We have brought forward the sacrifice ’ and ‘ From the sky 
they have learned ’ ® are regarding what has taken place as it were. ‘ Here 
however,^ the Stoma is not pervaded ’ Paingya used to say, ‘ since by verses 
alone the Stoma cannot be pervaded ’. ‘ The verse by means of syllables 

makes up the Stoma, with syllables the Nivid or Puroruc the verse ; the 
Stoma is pervaded then when either a Nivid or a Puroruc is recited. 

» Given in full in 99S. x. 10. 8. * RV. iii. 1. 

« KV. i. 88 ; 99S. x. 10. 8. ’ RV. iii. 1. 2. 

• RV. iv. 8 ; 99s. X. 10. 8. * wua api of H is clearly con-ect, itvaipi of the 

w RV. iv. 9 ; 99S. vi . 4. 1 , who, however, does comm, and most MSS. (K has nvabhi, read 

not even mention this as a variant here. also in the Anand. ed.) being an obvious 

» RV. vii. 121-8; 99S. x. 11. 2, 8, which blunder, 

allows both or one. 



506 ] 


The Chandomas 


[ — xxvi. 16 


Therefore® yonder triplet alone should be the Ajya ’ (they say). ' Yonder ' 
is according to the order of Paingya.® But the rule is ‘ both By it 
Vi9vamitra and Vasistha came into accord ; they grant accord to the pre- 
eminence of him who knows thus. Therefore should both be the Ajya, first 
that of Vasistha, then that of Vi9vamitra. 

xxvi. 15 . 'O Vayu, come to us, drinker of the pure* is (the triplet) to 
Vayu and to Indra and Vayu,^ containing (the word) ‘ go * in ‘ gone ’ * ; this 
is a symbol of the end ; the ninth day is the end ; he returns as it were, 
being gone to the end, for hence whitherward should he go ? In ‘ The 
lively pourer hath stood at the sacrifices it contains (the word) ‘ stand * ; 
this is a symbol of the end ; the ninth day is the end ; having gone to the 
end, he stands as it were, for hence whitherward should he go ? ‘ Dwelling 

in the sky, from the atmosphere, on the earth ’ is (the triplet ^) to Mitra and 
Varuna, containing (the woi'd) ‘ dwell ’ in ‘ dwelling ’ ; this is a symbol of the 
end ; the ninth day is the end ; having gone to the end, he dwells as it 
were, for hence whitherward sliould he go ? ‘ Come hither to us with all 

boons, O A9vins * is (the triplet) to the A9vins,® containing (the word) ‘ stand * 
in ‘ That standing place hath been proclaimed for you on earth * ; this is a 
symbol of the end ; the ninth day is the end : having gone to the end, he stands 
as it were, for hence whitherward should he go V ‘ Indra men invoke in 
the conflict* is (the triplet) to Indra;® ‘That he mny make our prayers 
oflective *, (in this) ‘ effective * denotes the highest ; this is a symbol of 
the end ; tlie ninth day is the end ; in the end he places the end. ‘ Agni, 
erect, hath established the favour of the bright one * is (the triplet) to the 
All-gods,"^ containing (the word) ‘ establish * ; this is a symbol of the end ; 
the ninth day is the end ; having gone to the end he establishes as it were, 
for hence whitherward should he go ? ‘ Forward she hath come forth with 

fostering current * is (the triplet) to Sarasvati.® In ‘ Forcing forward * there 
is repetition ; the ninth day is the end ; having gone to the end, he repeats 
as it were, for hence whitherward should he go ? These are the Praiigas by 
Vasistha, arranged in triplets ; Vasistha is Prajapati ; he is the extender of 

6 M seems to liave had, before ircamy iasmad ‘ RV. vii. 92. 1, 3, 5, according to 99S.xii. 6, 
oydpyataeva tasmdd ada era, of which the and vii. 92. 2. 4, and >ii. 90. 5. See for 

hecond clau.>$e has dropped out. The first the next nos. 2-8 9?®* 

is not essential and may be a gloss. * KV. vii. 92. 5. 

« M has vacasd for which vacasa may be an ^ RV. vii. 92. 2. 
unusual Sandhi. The sense is apparently ^ RV. vii. 6i. 1-3. 
as rendered, in which case the previous * RV. vii. 70. 1 - 3. 
clause can hardly be given to Paingya ; ® RV. vii. 27. 1-3. 

but as they refer to the Trca he approve.s, RV. vii. 39. 1-8. 

ados becomes a suitable description. The * RV. vii. 96. 1-3 (already cited in KB. xxvi. 
Anand. ed. has, absurdly, varcasa, 8). 

04 [ h .0.8. 25] 



XXVI. 15 — 


[506 


2'he Soma Sacrifice 

the sacrifice ; he is renewed at the repeated extension of the sacrifice ; 
verily in Prajapati they attain all their desires. The Prstha is the Brhat, 
the Qastra connected with the Rathantara ; this is a pairing, a symbol of 
generation. 

xxvi. 16. ‘ Three friendships hath man’s worship ’ is the first of the 
Marutvatlyas in Tristubh,' containing (the word) ‘ three ’ ; it is a symbol of 
the third day. ‘ Indra maketh for the car a way forward ’ is the second,*^ con- 
taining (the word) ‘stand’ in ‘hath stood upon’ in ‘Which in strength 
the generous one hath stood upon ’ ; this is a symbol of the end ; the ninth 
day is the end ; having gone to the end, he stands as it were, for hence 
whitherward should he go ? ‘ Stand on the bays being yoked to the car 

is the third,® containing (the word) ‘ stand ’ in ‘ stand ’ ; this is a symbol oi 
the end ; the ninth day is the end ; having gone to the end. he stands as it 
were, for hence whitherward should he go ? ‘ Let him sing the Saman 

springing forth as of a bird ’ is the fourth * ; (the word) ‘ Saman ’ is a 
symbol of yonder world. ‘ Sing ye forth to the glad one the song rich in 
food ’ is the fifth ® in Jagati ; in that it has the same ending, it has the 
symbol of the end. ‘ May the true one come hither, the generous, he of the 
Soma lees’ is the first of the Niskevalyas in Tristubh ® There is repetition 
in ‘ Let loose, 0 hero ’ ; the ninth day is the end ; having gone to the end, 
he repeats as it were, for hence whitherward shouM he go 1 ' To him the 

strong, the impetuous ’ is the second,^ having the same beginning in ‘ To 
him ’, and ‘ To him ’ ; just as that which has th(^ same ending, so that which 
has the same beginning is a symbol of the end. ‘ As the sky surpasscth the 
earth, O Indra, that which our foes ’ is the third ; (the word) ‘ sky ’ is a 
.symbol of yonder world. ‘ That highest power of thine is on high ’ is the 
fourth ® ; there is repetition in ‘ highest on high ’ ; the ninth day is the end ; 
having gone to the end, he repeats as it were, for hence whitherward should 
he go 1 ‘I was the first lord of wealth ’ and ‘ To the all conquering, the 
booty conquering, the light conquering ’ are two (hymns) in Jagati ; in ‘ 1 ’ 
and ‘ 1 ’ there is the same beginning ; just as that which has the same end- 
ing, so that which has the same beginning is a .symbol of the end ; in 
‘ conquering ’ and ‘ conquering ’ there is repetition ; the ninth day is the 


1 RV. V. 29 (already cited in KB. xxii. 4) ; 
ggS. X. 11. 6. 

* RV. V. 31 (already cited in KB. xx. 2) ; 95*S. 

X 11. 6. 

3 RV. iii. 36 (already cited in KB. xx. 4) j 99^. 
X. 11. 6. 

* RV. i. 173 (already cited in KB. xxiv. 6) ; 

99s. X. 11. 6. 

6 RV. i. 101 ; 99s. X. 11. 6. 


® RV. iv. G6 (already cited in KB. xxv. 7) ; 

99 s. X. 11. 7. 

’ RV. i. 66; 99S.X. 11. 7. 

® RV. vi. 20 (already cited in KB. xxv. 6) ; 
99 B. X. 11. 7. 

9 RV. i. 108 ; 99 s. X. 11. 7. 

’9 RV. X. 48 (already cited in KB. xxii. 4) and 
ii. 21 (already cited in KB. xxv. 7); 95^. 
X. 11. 7. 



507] 


The Ghandomas 


[ — xxvi. 17 


end ; having gone to the end he repeats as it were ; for hence whitherward 
should he go ? In the Marutvatiya are recited five hymns in the last Chan- 
doma ; the Chandomas arc cattle ; cattle are fivefold ; verily (they serve) to 
obtain cattle. Six at the end (are recited) in the Niskcvalya ; the year has 
six seasons; verily (they serve) to obtain the year. 

xxvi. 17. ‘ Towards thee, O god Savitr ’ is (the triplet) to Savitr ^ ; yonder 
world is turned towards (this) as it were; this is a symbol of yonder 
world. ‘ Forward towards you, mightily, sky and earth ’ is (the triplet) to 
sky and earth ; ^ there is repetition in ‘ Mightily, sky and earth, towards ’ ; 
the ninth day is the end ; having gone to the end, he repeats as it were, 
for hence whitherward should he go ? ‘ Let Indra give for food to us ’ is 

one (verse ^) ; * Give yc jewels ' are two ; these are (the triplet) to the 
Rbhus ; there is repetition in ‘ one one ’ in ‘ Each one each one with wise 
direction * ; the ninth day is the end ; having gone to the end he repeats as 
it were, for hence whitherward should he go ? Then the Vai5vadeva is 
composed of the whole of Manu’s (hymns ^); Manu is life; verily thus he 
places life in the sacrifice and in the sacrificers. Here are (the verses) with 
two Padas ; the explanation of them has been given. ‘ 0 ye All-gods, come 
hither’ is (the triplet) to the All-gods,® containing (the word) -go’ in 
‘ come hither ’ ; this is a symbol of the end ; the ninth day is the end ; he 
returns as it were, having gone to the end, for hence whitherward should 
he go ? It is in Gayatri, for this set of three days has the Gayatri at the 
third pressing. ‘ Present in the sky he shone ’ is to Vai 9 vanara ; ® ‘in the 
sky’ is a symbol of yonder world. ‘ O Maruts, in whose dwelling’ is (the 
hymn to the Maruts, containing (the word) ‘ dwell ’ in ‘ dwelling ’ ; this 
is a symbol of the end ; the ninth day is the end ; having gone to the end, 
he dwells as it were, for hence whitherward should he go ? ‘ Agni is the 

Hotr, the Purohita’ is (the hymn) to Jatavedas,® containing (the word) 
‘ dwell ’ in ‘ The dwelling, O thou of pure radiance ’ ; this is a symbol of the 
end ; the ninth day is the end ; having gone to the end, he dwells as it 
were, for hence whitherward should he go ? It is in Gayatri, for this set 
of three days has the Gayatri at the third pressing. These are the 
hymns of the Agnimaruta. These are the hymns of this day. It is 
an Ukthya. It obtains what the third day obtains. Daily in all the 


’ RV. i. 24. 3-6 (all eady cited in KB. viii. 1) ; 
<?9S. X. 11. 8. 

* RV. iv. 66. 6-7 ; 99 S. x. 11. 8. 

* RV. viii. 93. 34 and i. 20. 7 and 8 ; x. 

11 . 8 . 

* RV. viii. 27-31 ; 95®* ii* omitting viii. 

28. 4. 


® RV. ii. 41. 1 3-16 (aU-eady cited in KB. xxiv. 
2) ; 99s. X. 11. 8. 

® The verses are given in 95®* 9. 

RV. i. 86 (also cited in KB. xxviii. 3) ; 95®* 
X. 11. 9. 

8 RV. iii. 11 ; 99 S. x. 11. 9. 



[608 


xxvi. 17 — ] The Soma Saciijice 

Cbandomas (the verses) of two Padas are recited ; the Chandomas are 
cattle ; (the verses) with two Padas are the metre of the sacrificer ; verily 
thus he places the sacrificers in the overlordship of cattle ; man stands 
over cattle as it were. 


ADHYAYA XXVII 


The Soma Sacrifice {continued). 


The Tenth Daij of the Dagardtra. 

xxvii. 1. ‘ The tentli day ^ is that which is above in the sky ' Kausitaki 
used to say ; therefore it is what is not to be explained, for no one knows 
this clearly. ‘ Let me not explain ignorantly ’ (he thinks). The tenth day 
is a limited divine rite ; it is the Anustubh ; he who explains it makes 
a surplus ; stumbling is liable to befall him who explains. As to this they 
say ‘ Let him explain ; the sacrifice rejoices at the approach of a wise man, 
What^ is to become successful in me, that will he cause to be successful/' ' 
If any person inadvertently makes an error, then he who observes it should 
aside repeat the passage as a self study, or the householder or one of the 
priests should creep up, and he aside should recite the passage as a self 
study.^ If he does not think this proper, he should at once explain."^ The 
Anustubh is released on the tenth day ; the Anustubh is speech ; now speech 
having borne the burden becomes as it were the bearer of a dread thing.^ 


' For the tenth day of the Dii<?aratra which 
ends the twelfth month of the year Sattra 
see AB. v. 22-25. For the ritual see 
99 s. X, 12. For llie non-use of the 
Anustubh see B 9 S. xvi. 6. 

* As cited by Anartiya on 99^- ^2. 5 the 

reading is the more simple one yato 
*8amrddhamf but it is very unlikely tliat 
this could have been changed into the 
reading of the text. The Anand. ed. has 
*yam me. 

* This is the sense as taken by Anartiya on 

99 s. I- c. M curiously inserts yas tarn 
tatra bruy&i after adhiyat. 

* The lack of a concluding iti as often renders 

uncertain the point at which the text of 
the view cited stops. 

® M has kriiravaheva and this in view of 
IMohvi^l is clearly correct, though the 
comm, has krUrarareva. M has (vdg)vr 
{tadohu^) in a correction. This Anustubh 


verse, despite its clear character and the 
particles, has escaped the vigilance of 
the odd. and of the Vedic Concordance. The 
words lad endm, for which M has the far 
simpler and probably certain fad etan 
(ignored by Lindner',, appear to me to 
be prefixed to fit the verse, which seems 
to be a relic of old Indian Niti literature, 
in order to adopt the sense to the Anu- 
stubh which is the subject of the com- 
parison. M lias the excellent reading 
prasisrksdmi. The verse is, of course, in 
very free Anustubh form and me ^sti 
may be read in d for the sake of the 
metre. M has punfalydyanam me ^stiH 
which is best taken as a cpd. (pufi^aly- 
dyanam) and not as hyper sandli i. It is best 
to read asti and take iti as quoting the 
whole verso, and not as part of the verse. 
sampddayati is read by M and Anand., 
and is preferable to the plural in Lindner. 



609] The Tenth Day of the Dagaratra [ — xxvii. 2 

Therefore is it released, (as they think) ‘ Lot ns not consort with speech/ 
Now all the metres here he converts into the Anustubh ; there is this (verse) 

* Her I touch not as being a (^QdrE ; 

Yet will I not let her go ; 

Nowhere else do I go ; 

To a courtesan is my approaching/ 

for on the tenth day here the Anustubh is sung around. 

They say, ‘ He should not abandon the abode of the Anustubh ; there 
should he recite Viraj verses; the Viraj and the Anustubh are the same 
metre, for not by one syllable is a metre made different, nor yet by two/ 
Of these two triplets there are six syllables over, and six of the strophe 
and antistrophe of the Agnistoma Stoan ; these twelve syllables the Hotr 
should make up in the morning litany. He need not trouble as to this ; it 
is made up here. ‘ There is an Usnih additional/ we hold,® ‘ or a Gayatri ; 
that he should make up at the morning litany.’ He need not trouble about 
this ; it is made up here. 

xxvii. 2. ‘ O Agni, this to-day as a steed with praises ’ is the Ajya.* 
That being created for the tenth day he need not make up. He need not 
trouble as to this ; it is made up here. The Praliga is by Madhuchandas ; 
the explanation of this has been given. With an Atichandas (verse), ‘ In 
the three bowls the bull that mixed with barley, he of strong power,’ he 
begins the Marutvatiya.^ It made up amounts to sixty-four syllables ; these 
make up two Anustubhs. ‘ Sing aloud to Indra ’ and ‘ Forward to Indra, 
the great’, these two Pragathas'^ he recites along with the ‘Water swellers’ 
before the hymn^; so is it made up. ‘Thou hast been born dread, for 

Lindner treats it as prose, and so also ® The mysterious and unusual menima/icoccur- 
Aufrecht (ZDMCI. xxxiv. 75, 76), who ring here and recognized also by Anartiya 

renders ‘Dos>halb will ich einerseits sie in his i-itation of the passage yields only 

weder beriihren, well ich mich mit this sense. Tho making up of the number 

keinem (Ifirmenden) 9^^*'‘^"Weibe be- of syllables of an Usnili or Gayatri is 

(assen will ; noch gehe ich zu einer ganz given by Anaitiya as the result of three 

verschiedenen Form liber, sonst wiirde recitings, 12 + 6 + 6 = 24 = tho Gayatri. If 

man von mir sagen, ich gliche einer 2 Viraj triads replace two of Anustubh 

lockeren Dime ’. But this necessitates then there are clearly six extra syllables, 

the reading of prasisaksdni {prasangene- Viraj = 33, and Amistubh =- 32 syllables. 

cMmi in comm.), ignores the metre, and M has udaiti, which is preferable, 

takes the iti as part of tho quotation. For i RV. iv. 40 ; 99S. x. 13. 1. 
ydmcdti see Mahdbhdsya on Pftn. v. 3. 68 ; * RV. ii. 22. 1 ; 99®* ^* ^^* 8, 9 (the remainder 

Kdgikd on v. 3. 77. The Anand. ed. has of tlie stroplio is viii. 68. 2, 3). 

vdhevdbhimrfe and ydmdka (so M). Cf. also ® RV. viii. 89 1 and 2 ; 3 and 4, with i. 64. 16 
Keith, JRAS. 1916, pp. 602, 603. BOht- without any call intervening ; hence 

lingk (BKSGW. Apr. 23, 1897), also samfansati ; see Anartlya on 99®* ^^* 

ignoring the metre, reads ydmi kirky but 10. 

this is impossible. ^ I. o. RV. x. 73 ; 99®* ** ^^* ^^* 



xxvii. 2 — ] The Soma Sacrifice [610 

impetuous strength ’ is the Marutvatiya ^ of the one-day (rite) ; the one-day 
(rite) is a support; verily (it serves) for support. ‘With what hath he 
come, the brilliant one? ’ and ‘ With what aid thou to us ? on the basis ® of 
the Vamadevya is imposed the Rathantara. The Saman is for Agni and is 
performed on Indra verses; this is a pairing, a symbol of generation. 
There are as many Usnih triads as Pragathas ; one verso of two Padas 
forms the inserted verse, another the seventeenth of the hymn ; this is made 
up. ‘I shall proclaim the manly deeds of Indra * is the Niskevalya*^ of the 
one-day (rite) ; the one-day (rite) is a support ; the tenth day is a support ; 
the two (verses of) two Padas are a metre on which to find support ; verily 
(they serve) for support. ‘ To the god Savitr in the bowls the sage,’ with 
this Atichandas verse he begins the Vai^vadeva it made up amounts to 
sixty-four syllables ; these make up two Aiiustuhhs ; the antistrophe 
contains (the word) ‘ towards ’ ; the explanation of this has been given. 
Then, before the ' Prosperity to us ’ hymn,^ he recites the ‘ Forward the 
bright ’ hymn ; the one-day (rite) is a support ; the tenth day is a support ; 
(the verses) of two Padas arc a metre on which to find support ; verily (they 
serve) for support. The Agnistoma Saman as the Vamadevya is performed 
on Viraj verses ; the Viraj is prosperity and proper food ; (verily they serve) 
to obtain the Virjy as prosperity and proper food. Moreover the Vamadevya 
is healing and medicine ; verily thus at the end in the sacrifice are healing 
and medicine produced. 

xxvii. 3. Jn that they perform the additional litany^ of the conjunct 
(form), thereby they obtain the additional litany. Now this is the milk- 
ing of the tenth day ; they must make up the day so that there may be 
a thousand and fifteen Anustubhs ; taking out fifteen, then of each hundred 
four he takes out ; thus are fifty-five taken out. Then the rest make up 
thirty sets of thirty-two. Now this is the Anustubh of the Stomas and 
the syllables ; the Gayatri has eight syllables ; the Stoma is the twenty- 
fourfold ; so the Anustubh of the Stoma and the syllables has thirty-two 
l>arts. Now there is the Anustubh of the Padas ; there are six Padas in 
the Gayatri and Usnih ; three in the Viraj : these make nine ; four in the 
Brhati ; these make thirteen ; five in the Pankti ; these make eighteen ; 
four in the Tristubh ; these make twenty- two ; in the Jagatl and Atichandas 
eight ; these make thirty ; two in the verse of two Padas ; these make 

^ RV. X. 78 (already cited in KB. xv. 3). * Cited abov(‘ KB. xxiii. 7. 

RV. iv. 81. 1-3 and viii. 98. 19-21 ; see ® RV. i. 89 (already cited in KB. xx. 4) ; 95®* 

vii. 22. 2, and for the Rathantara, &c., x. 13. 18 

X. 18 11. RV. vii. 34 (already cited in KB. xxii. 9) ; 

RV. i. 82 (already cited in KB. xv. 4). The 55®* 1^* 18. 

Dvipadas are RV. vii. 34. 4 ; viii. 29. 4 ; RV. vii. 1. 1-6. 

95 s. X. 13. 18. ' For this see 95®* 18. 21*25. 



511] The Tenth Day of the Dagaratra [ — xxvii. 4 

thirty-two; so the Anustubh of the Padas becomes of thirty-two parts. 
Now there is the Anustubh of the gods*; eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, 
twelve Adityas, Indra as the thirty-second ; so the Anustubh of the deities 
becomes of thirty-two parts. Now the fifty-five taken out are forty-four 
Pankti verses ; the forty of these are the udder, the four over the teats ; 
thus the Anustubh of the Stoma and the syllables with this udder and these 
teats pours over this body of Indra, the fast day ; by reason of the pouring 
over * of it the Chandomas increase both as regards Stomas and (^astras ; 
he who knows it becomes composed thereof ; he who knows thus before his 
life (is over) becomes master of this body of Indra, the fast day*; him this 
Anustubh of the Stoma and the syllables with this udder, these teats, with 
all flavours, all delights, all proper food, all immortality besprinkles, who 
recites the tenth day (rite) as thus made up. ‘ Therefore should he recite 
the tenth day (rite) as thus made up,’ (they say).® 

xxvii. 4. In that they perform the additional litany of the transposed’ 
(form), verily tlms they delight mind. That with all the sacrifices they 
recite, for this is the measure of mind. When the tenth day is over, before 
the offerings to the wives (with the gods), at this moment they creep 
forward, saying ‘ The wives are unworthy of .sacrifice, for they are outside 
the altar.’ But the rule is (that they do so) when the offerings to the 
wives have been completed. ‘ Here a little space is left over for rivals,’ 
(thinking thus) they creep forward together and sing with the verses of 
the serpent queen ; * the serpent queen is this (earth), for .she is'the queen of 
what creeps ; the serpent queen is speech, for speech is the queen of what 
creeps ; moreover, the serpent queen is the cow, for the cow is the queen of 
what creeps. ‘ The spotted bull hath come ’, this triplet ® he should not 
omit, to prevent the omission of the .strophe. ‘ In us place manliness ’ (he 
says) ; manliness is food ; verily thus he places food in the sacrifice and in 


* devatyd in M is equally isolated as a form 

with devalcya, 

* vijaksarenai^ixii extraordinary and impossible 

form ; possibly dbhiksarena may be in- 
tended, but M has viksatena, 

* The Anand. ed. has prafyam ahar twice an d so 

M, wiiich after the first abhiksaratt inserts 
sarvendnnddyena saruii rasais sarvaih kdmais 
sarver^mrtatvendhhiktaratt. It also has 
yad u vai veda and sa yet evathvid (isyd° 
(which is suggested by the reading of tlie 
Anand. also) and at the end it omits 
sarvai rasath and inserts sarvaih kdmaih 
alter annddyena, 

* The composition of the number of verses is 


given by Anartiya on ^(JS. xi. 12 (ii. 
63-79, ed. Hillebrandt'. 

^ vyuJhasya is omitted in M and may be an 
interpolation. For the atiriktoktha of tlie 
samudha see 59®* 21-26. 

2 sdrpardjnl {°rdj?iyark8ii by liypor samllii ; 

p. 71) is a curious form for sarpardj%\ 
and may be a mere error ; per contra 
sarpardjnindm is used in Ap9^S. xxi. 10. 5 
of the versos. The verses are sdrpardjh'i, 
as Anartiya on 99S- x. 13. 29 says. Cf. 
AB. V. 23. M has the short vowel of vac. 

3 RV. X. 189. 1-3 ; 99s. x. 13. 26. Garbe, 

Ap9S. ili. 475, incorrectly identifies the 
ref. in Ap9S. xxi. 10. 6. 



xxvii. 4 — ] The Soma Sacrifice [612 

the sacrificera. ‘ O breath obtainer, that hear the call ’ (he says) ; ^ the 
breath obtainer is Indra, for he having obtained the breath goes round seek- 
ing bodies. (Now the) Adhvaryu ; he offers in the Garhapatya two libations 
to Prajapati, without mention (of the deity) ; the Garhapatya is Prajapati ; 
the Stotra and Qastra end with the two libations ; the Stotra is completed ; 
the Qasti'a is completed; the discussion of the Brahman is completed. 
Moreover they may ® if they will offer a sacrifice, and take food. Here is 
V ena.^* These are obviously the bodies of Prajapati ; them let the Hotr recite. 

xxvii. 5. ‘Eater of food and mivstress of food' (is one form ^) ; the eater of 
food is this (earth) ; the mistress of food yonder (sky). ‘ The fair and the 
beautiful ' (is a second) . the fair is the Soma ; the beautiful is cattle. ^ The 
unresting and the fearless ' (is a third) ; the unresting is Vayu, for he never 
rests ; the fearless is death, for he has no fear. ‘ The unattained and the 
unattainable ' (is a fourth) ; the unattained is this earth ; the unattain- 
able yonder sky. ‘ The unattacked and the unattackable ' (is a fifth) ; tlie 
unattacked is Agni here ; he unattackable yonder Aditya. ‘ That which has 
no prius and no rival ’ ; that which has no prius is the mind; that which has 
no rival the year. Now he yonder who gives heat is yonder householder, 
for he is a lord of houses, his houses are the seasons ; he is a lord and he is 
also a god from whom evil has been smitten away. The Adhvaryu runs 
northward ; they close the doors of the Sadas and also of the shed.’^ 

xxvii. 6. They ^ lay hold of the branch of Udumbara ; the Udumbara is 
strength and proper food ; (it serves) for the obtaining of strength and 
proper food. The Hotr should make his two hands the highest (thinking), 
* M inserts before vdtdper the woi ds ilt7iinnam ® The Vena hymn is RV. x. 123 (already cited 
piirva^n aha tathd hdnydtmdnantaritd bhavati. in KB. viii. 6), but that it should occur 

The verse is the last Pada of a verse in here (M clearly has the same reading, 

99s. X. 17. 6, where vdtdpe is re«id as here after a lacuna) is strange and not very 

also in OoC and the Ariand. ed. but not probable, nor is the form of citation usual, 

in M ; in MS. i. 9. 1 it occurs with The comm, takes it as Vena is kanta. 

vdfdpayah < fermenting* (of the Soma AB. i. 20. 2 (cf. KB. xxviii, 9) has the 

drink), and in TA. iii. 3. I with vdldpeh, same phrase in tho sense ‘ The Voiia 

which is apparently a genitive with t^ital air) is horu (in tho navel) ’which is 

haiana^rutah. The preceding words are intelligible with regard to hhakteyah. 

found in MS. L c. ; TA. iii. 1. 1 ; 99S. > See 99S. x. 19. 1 ; AB. v. 25. 

X. 14. 6 in a different context. OoC and * This is the Brahmodya according to AB. v. 
tho Anand. ed. have the absurd reading 25. KB. omits all mention of the different 

vdtam dtmd (K has vdcain). Dayahotr, Caturhotr, Pancahotr, Sadhotr, 

® M has the excellent reading ato nv evdpi and Saptahotr recitations given in 95S. 

which is much better than ajiye of the x. 14-18, and referred to in Ap9S. xxi. 10. 

other MSS. and tho Anand. ed., and B9S. xvi. 7 refers only to the Caturhotrs. 

involves only a change of a letter. ^ The verses are at this juncture three; see 
Anartiya, on 99^* anj/e, and 59^^- 21. 10. M hi\s dvdrau i^dldydi} ca. 

observes that the option of a sacrifice xxvii. 6. ^ The ritual of this chapter and of 
here is not accepted in tho Sutra. M the last sentence of the preceding cliapter 

has also anirukfe samsthe. is given in 99^* 21. Cf. AB. v. 24. 



613 ] 


The Tenth Day of the Dagaratra [ — ^xxvii. 7 

* Let me be the highest ’ ; the highest does he become. In silence, with 
closed eyes, they sit until the Naksatras appear ; speech do they make to 
grow strong in that they sit in silence, (thinking) ‘ Speech grown strong 
and poured upon may we obtain at the end.’ Near the Marjaliya, when the 
Naksatras (appear), they open their eyes ; the Naksatras are light ; verily 
thus they place light in themselves. They enter the two oblation holders 
by the western door ; then the Adhvaryu approaching the pole of the 
northern oblation holder says * Do thou sing the Prosperity of the Sacrificial 
Session ’ ; he sings the ‘ Prosperity of the Sacrificial Session ’ ; thus they 
obtain the prosperity of the saerificial session. All perform the finale of 
the Saman ; the finale is a support ; verily (it serves) for support. They 
creep beneath the axle of the northern oblation holder, muttering an 
Atichandas verse to Indra^; verily thus by the Atichandas verse the 
sacrificers smite away evil under the axle. ' We go round (them) to the 
north Kausitaki used to say, ‘ following the path of the sacrifice, not being 
concealed from the Seven Rsis.’ Having taken up their places in front of the 
oblation holders they think of what they desire; whatever they desire 
‘ Let this desire be fulfilled for us,’ this desire for them is fulfilled ; those 
who have many desires should mutter the three exclamations, blmhy himvah, 
8var. Having gone out to the east and to the north they vie in invoking 
speech, (thinking) ‘ Let not speech be averted.’ They release the speech of 
the Subrahmanya ^ ; the Subrahmanya is the holy power ; verily thus with 
the holy power do they utter speech. They go to the Agnidhriya along 
with the king ; this is as if men should conduct the king, or his vicegerent,^ 
when wearied to an abode ; Soma the king they day by day, having taken 
down from the oblation holders, conduct to the Agnidh’s altar ; at the 
Agnidhriya they settle down with the king. 

xxvii. 7. In ^ that they perform the Da9aratra in its conjunct form, verily 
(it serves) to obtain all desires. In that they perform it in its transposed 
form, verily (it serves) to obtain all the metres. In that they perform both 
the transposed and the conjunct forms, verily (it serves) to confer variety 
on the Da^aratra. The conjunct form was alone in the beginning. The 
metres desired one another’s place, (thinking) ‘ Let us all be first, all be in 
the middle, and all at the end.’ Moreover thus he makes all the metres 

* The verse is RV. i. 132. 6. The rite is one * According to BR. this term denotes any one 

with many parallels ; cf. Henry, La magie having a claim to the rank ; it occurs 

dans Vlnde, pp. 182, 133. again in 99^* 5. 8, 4 ; 15. 3. 

3 99^* ^ suhrahmanydpratikam ^ This cliapter explains the use of the two 

ahhivydhj'tya. See also Jaimirilya Qrauta forms samUlha and vyiUhay the details of 

Sutray iii. The AB. v. 8 deals much more which have been given above. The 

fully with the Subrahiuany& priest and variation of metres at the several Tryahas 

formula. is added. 

65 [h.O.S. 26] 



[614 


xxvii. 7 — ] The Soma Sacrijice 

sharers in all the pressings. The first set of three days has the Gayatri at 
the morning pressing, the Tristubh at the midday, and the Jagatl at the 
third pressing. The second set of three days has the Jagati at the morning 
pressing, the Gayatri at the midday, and the Tristubh at the third pressing. 
The third set of three days has the Tristubh at the morning pressing, the 
Jagati at the midday, and the Gayatri at the third pressing. The tenth 
day has the Gayatri at the morning pressing ; thus from the same metre to 
the same metre they proceed. Again in that they transform the tenth day 
into Anustubh verses, and this day is speech, and the Anustubh is speech, 
verily thus they establish speech in speech. Immortality they obtain who 
perform the tenth day (rite). 

ADHYAYA XXVIII 

The Soma Sacrifice {coiitimied). 

The Recitations of the Hotrakas at the Morning Pressing. 

xxviii. 1. Prajapati ^ created the sacrifice; with it when created the gods 
sacrificed ; having sacrificed with it they obtained all desires. One half of 
it they deposited, namely the Praisas and the Nigadas. With the other 
(half of the) sacrifice the Rsis sacrificed ; they observed ^ * With an incom- 
plete sacrifice are we sacrificing; we do not obtain all desires.’ They 
toiled; they saw the Praisas and Nigadas. Having sacrificed with the 
sacrifice with the Praisas and Nigadas they obtained all desires, (thinking) 
‘ The Praisas and the Nigadas are so much ^ of the sacrifice as is not made 
up by the Rc verses. Thus with them shall we make up the whole.’ These 
Praisas and Anupraisas ^ Vi9vamitra saw, and also the Praisas for the cake 
offering ; then other Rsis (saw) others. As to this they say ‘ Why does 
the Maitravaruna alone give directions to all ? ’ The deities ran a race 
regarding the Praisas ; the race Mitra and Varuna won ; tlierefore the 
Maitravaruna ® alone gives directions to all. He gives directions standing, 
(thinking) ‘ Standing is one strongest, standing also is one most easily 
heard ; let me utter speech full of strength and resorting to the gods ’. 

1 There is no precise parallel to this in the * vijajnuh is clearly to be read ; see Gaastra, 
AB. With the views here given may be VOJ. xxiii. 64. 

contrasted the statement quoted in ^ etdvafc points to ctdvanlo as the correct 
Anartlya’s comm, on 99'^* reading ; cf. in KB. xxii. 9 devajdte appa- 

that allNivids, Puroriics, and Praisas are rently for °jaiau. 

Vi 9 vamitra^s, and all other Mantras in ^ pratmn only is read by M, but probably not 
Brahmanas or Kalpas are Vamadeva's. correctly. 

Cf. below, KB. xxviii. 8 ; RVKli. Anukra- ® See 99^. v. 16. 1 seq. 
inani in Scheftelowitz, p. 131. 



616] The Morning Recitations of the Hotrahas [ — xxviii. 3 


xxviii. 2. ‘ Leaning forward like one slightly bent should he recite ; thus 
is Parjanya likely to rain ’ Kausitaki used to say. Now the Asuras and the 
Raksases used to impede^ the oblations; then Vamadeva saw the appropriate 
(verses ^), ‘ Agni the Hotr at our sacrifice ’ ; with them they led Agni round. 
Therefore these Raksases, the destructive, they smote away. He recites an 
appropriate (verse ^), containing (the word) ‘accept’, ‘Accept our most 
extending’, (thinking) ‘Let me utter speech appropriate and containing 
(the word) accept ” among the gods.' ‘ Set this sacrifice for us among the 
immortals with these (verses ^) Vi^vamitra makes acceptable the drops. 
These are their invitatory verses, these their ottering verses ; therefore are 
they appropriate. A verse of Vi^vamitra’s he recites as the invitatory 
verse ® for the Svistakrt ottering in (the sacrifice of) the cake ; the explana- 
tion of this has been given. Verses of Vi5vamitra’s lie recites in each 
pressing as invitatory verses for the cakes ; Vi^vamitra saw these Praisas for 
the cakes ; (verily they serve) for correspondence. Two appropriate verses 
of Madhuchandas ® he recites as invitatory verses for the first of those for 
two deities ; Madhuchandas saw these Praisas I’or these two deities ; 
(verily they serve) for correspondence. A verse by Grtsamada ^and 
a verse by Medhatithi ^ he recites, being appropriate, for the second two. 
Verses by Medhatithi ^ he recites at the morning pressing for (the goblets) 
being filled ; Medhatithi at the morning pressing proclaimed the Soma to 
Indra ; these (verses) contain (the words) ‘ hither’ and ‘ bay steeds’ with the 
symbols of the invitatory verses ; they are addressed to Indra, for the sacri- 
ficial rite is Indra’s ; they are Gayatrl verses ; the morning pressing is in 
Gayatri. Nine verses he recites ; nine goblets do they fill. 

xxviii. 3. Six ^ some repeat at the morning pressing for (the goblets) being 
filled ; (six tlie Maitravaruna) himself, the Achavaka the seventh ; seven 
each at the second and third pressings, saying ‘ Seven seated eastwards per- 
form the va^at call.’ As to this they say ‘ According to the hymn should 
he I’ecite, for these are the invitatory verses of the Hotr, for these goblets 
they fill up goblet by goblet as the Hotr’s ; therefore should he recite 
according to the hymn.’ Then the Hotrakas sacrifice together ; the explana- 


' M has the conunon word vimathnatCf need- 
lessly. For kw-akra^prahdna cf. 99^* v. 
16. 4. 

RV. iv. 15. 1-S; see 99^* they are 

said for the paryagni by the MaitrS,yaruna. 

8 RV. i. 76 ; see 99 S. v. 18. 1. It and the 
next are for the stokcis, 

* RV. iii. 21. 

6 RV. iii. 28, 1 ; see 99 S. vii. 1. 6. 

6 RV. i. 2. 1 ; and i. 2. 4 ; see 99®* vii. 2. 2, 
for the Indra-Vayu cup. 


’ RV. ii. 41. 4 ; see 9?®* vii. 2. 8 for the 
Mitra-Varuna cup. 

8 RV. i. 22. 1 ; see 99®* vii. 2, 8 for the A 9 vin 

cup. 

9 RV. i. 16. 1-9 ; see 99 S. vii. 4. 1. 

xxviii. 3. 1 For this chapter see AB. vi. 9, 
The nine verses here are reduced to seven 
because of the seven offering verses enu- 
merated in the rest of the chapter said 
by the seven priests, Hotr and Hotrakas. 



[516 


xxviii. 3 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

tion of this has been given. The Maitravaru^ uses (a verse) to Mitra and 
Varuna,** ‘ Mitra we hail,’ to secure that the beginning of the sacrifice shall 
be provided with its own deity. ‘ Indra thee as a bull we (this verse) to 
Indra ® the Brahmanacchansin (uses), for the sacrificial rite is connected with 
Indra. ‘ O Maruts in whose dwelling (this verse) to the Maruts * the Potr 
(uses) ; -vthen the Maruts purified Indra, then Indra gave them a share in the 
Soma drinking ; therefore is it (a verse) addressed to the Maruts that the 
Potr uses as offering verse at the first and at the last. ‘ O Agni bring 
hither the wives ’, (this verse ®) which contains (the words) ‘ O Agni, with 
the wives ’ and (the word) ‘ Tvastr,’ the Nestr uses at the first and at the 
last ; Agni is the one of the gods who is connected with (the words) ‘ with 
the wives’, the Nestr is the one of the priests (so connected) ; therefore it is 
(a verse) which contains (the words) ‘ Agni with the wives ’ and (the word) 
‘ Tvastr ’ that the Nestr uses as offering verse at the first and at the last. ‘ To 
him whose food is the ox, whose food the cow ’, (this verse) to Agni ® is used 
by the Agnidh ; he kindles the fires ; therefore the Agnidh uses (this verse) 
to Agni as offering verse at the first and at the last. They repeat the 
second vasat, for the healing of the libations, for the support of the liba- 
tions. Then comes the sacrificial food, then the bowl of the Hotr; the 
explanation of this has been given. 

xxviii. 4. When Nabhanedistha Manava sought an invitation from the 
Angirases, he saw this Hotr function of the Achavaka ; he came when the 
sacrificial food had been invoked ; therefore one does not select him.^ He 
came from this eastern intermediate region ; therefore seated in this region 
the Achavaka awaits his invitation. They say ‘ Why do they keep a frag- 
ment of the cake for the Achavaka ? ’ Alikayu Vacaspata was the Brahman 
at the consecration and Upasads of the Naimlsiyas ; he performed the 
Achavaka’s function when the pressing had been done. They said ‘ We 
have hitherto kept the Brahman’s portion for him ; for whom shall we 
keep it ? ’ Then said they ‘ For him do ye keep it.’ They kept it for 

2 RV. i. 23. 4 ; 99®. vii. 4. 6. The phrase MW., a verse containing the words agne 

anavarardhyai oifers great difficulty of painlr, the compound adj. being a natural 

interpretation (cf. anavdrdhya in xxv. 16), device to get over the difficulty of saying 

and seemsan error tovanavardddhyai. The * containing Agni and patnl \ M has the 

Hotrakas* performance is the so-called variant Tvastd vai, which is clearly bad. 

Prasthita libations, yajan^t has, of course, ® RV. viii. 48, 11 ; 99®* 
the precise sense of ‘say the offering ^ The point here is the late place of the 
verses *. Achavaka in the Soma offering which he 

® RV. iii. 40. 1 ; 99 ®* ^^^* *** later, it is clear, attained ; see 

* RV. i. 86. 1 (already cited in KB. xxvi. 17) ; Oaland and Henry, VAgnistomaf p. 220 ; 

99 ®* vii. 4. 8. Oldenberg, Religion dea Veda, pp. 384, n. 2 ; 

» RV. i. 22. 9 ; 99S. vii. 4. 9. The sense of 897, n. 2. Cf. KB. vi. 13, 14. 

agnipdtmvatyd must be thus, that is, as in 



617] The Morning Recitations of the Hotrakas [ — xxviii. 7 

him. This is the Brahman’s portion. Moreover the other goblets share in 
the sacrificial food ; therefore they keep for the Achavaka the fragment of 
the cake, to prevent the goblet having none of the sacrificial food.® 

xxviii, 5. Then the Adhvaryu says to him ‘ O Achavaka, say what thou 
hast to say ’ ; verily thus he says to him ‘ 0 Achavaka, expect an invitation.’ 
‘ Hither Agni for help for you (these verses) to Agni he recites ; the morn- 
ing pressing is connected with Agni; they are Anustubh verses; the 
Anustubh is the Gayatri ; the metre of Agni is the Gayatrl, They are 
three ; Agni is threefold, coals, fiame, and smoke. At the third saying with 
the Pranava of the last verse, he unites the Nigada,^ * O sacrificer, O Hotr, 
O Adhvaryu, 0 Agnidh, O Brahman, O Potr, O Nestr, and thou also, 
O Upavaktr.’ The Upavaktr is the Pra^astr ; it is said in a Rc,* ‘ The 
Upavaktr of men.’ ‘ Be forcible with force, strong with strength ’ (he says) ; 
‘ Force as food, strength as food with food do ye unite,’ in effect, he says to 
them. ‘ To you may the kin, may those that are not kin yield (he says) ; 

* Whatever is kin, and whatever is not kin, may that yield to you,’ verily 
thus he says to them. This is declared in a Rc,^ 

xxviii. 6. ‘ Kin or no kin, crush the foes.’ ‘ The rivals beaten down in 
the way’ (he says) ; ‘Your rivals are destroyed in battle’, verily thus he 
says to them. ‘ Conquer the attacking, conquer with the attacking ’ ^ (he 
says) ; the attacking is an army ; ‘ With an army an army conquer,’ 
verily thus he says to them. ‘ May Indra hear, may Agni hearken to you ’ 
(he says); ‘Let Indra hear you, let Agni hear’, verily thus he utters this 
benediction. ‘ Standing forth, do ye proclaim the Soma to Indra and Agni, 
and do ye, O Brahmans, invite® us who are Brahmans,’ verily thus he 
requires an invitation from all. * This Brahman here, or Achavaka, desires 
an invitation ’, the Adhvaryu says, ‘ O Hotr, do thou invite him.’ Him the 
Hotr invites, for he is the chief sharer of them; ‘Whomever his chief 
invites, he indeed is invited ’ Kausitaki used to say. 

xxviii. 7. ‘ To him athirst ^ ’ the Achavaka recites for (the goblet) being 

* The sense of aparldatdyai is clear, and while read with urJorj° in place of Lindner^s 

parJditayai would be simpler, the sense ftrjo 'rjayadfvoam, which is also found in 

of pan as ‘ apart from ’ is possible. the An and. ed. In h read jihatdm. 

^ See 99®* The Mantra is ^ RV. iv. 9. 6. 

printed in 99 S. vii. 6. 3 as tmayadhvam ! * RV. iv. 4. 5 d. 

and so in the Vedic Concordance^ and this xxviii. 6. ^ Though 95®* ^* ® 

is, if taken from isayaU as a denomina- ahhttvarydhj it is a vox nihili and abli'itvaryd 

tive, correct, as isaisayadhvam would be is actually found in A 9 S. v. 7. 8, which 

necessary from Vis as causative ; an has jayata for the rare jesatha, 

instr. ied is more probable than isc as * vocatopo must be read as in 95®* ^“* ^* 

first element, but it is possible that ise xxviii. 7. ^ RV. vi. 42 (already citod in KB. 
sayadhmm misunderstood as two words xxiii. 2) ; the four verses contradict the 

may explain the sayate, go, of DhOtupatha, one verse of KB. xxviii. 8. See 99 S. vii. 

xiv. 8. Probably therefore I'lcs® should be 7. 1. 



[618 


xxviii. 7 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

filled ; these are four ; all this (universe) is fourfold ; verily (it serves) to 
obtain all this (universe). They are Anustubh verses, for reciting together. 
The last is a Brhati ; the Brhati is prosperity ; verily thus at the last he 
finds support in prosperity. ‘ Come with those that move at dawn/ with (this 
verse ^) to Indra and Agni he offers, for his litany is addressed to India and Agni. 
It is in Gayatri ; the morning pressing is in Gayatri. He says the second 
vasat, for the healing of the libations, for the support of the libations. 

* Without taking in breath should they say the offering verses at the morn- 
ing pressing,’ Paihgya used to say, (thinking) ‘ Swiftly shall we give the 
oblation to the gods.’ ‘ By half verses’ Kausitaki (used to say). The half 
verse is the joint of the metres ; verily thus by joints they give the oblation 
to the gods.'^ 

xxviii. 8. Then^ comes the consideration of the Praisas for the season 
(sacrifices). Kanva it was who saw the Praisas for the seasonal (sacrifices) ; 
and Medhatithi the offering verses ^ ; Medhatithi is a descendant of Kanva. 
With this tlic two smote away ^ evil. He who desires ‘ May I smite away 
death, the evil,’ should sacrifice with these. 

xxviii. 9. The^ sacrifice is a man; the Ajya is his speech ; speech is one 
only ; therefore he recites the Ajya with one deity only. The Praiiga is 
the breaths ; the breaths are many ; therefore many deities arc celebrated 
at the Praiiga. The Maitravaruna and the Achavaka are the two arms ; 
these are twofold ; therefore they recite (verses) for two deities at the 
morning pressing. The Brahmanacchahsin is the middle as this navel 
suture ^ ; therefore the Brahmanacchahsin at the morning pressing recites 
(verses) to one deity. The midday (pressing) is the body; it is one only; 
therefore at the midday the Hotra reciters recite (verses) to one deity; and 
the Hotr himself the Niskevalya. The Maitravaruna and the Achavaka are 
the two thighs ; these are twofold ; therefore they recite at the third 
pressing (verses) to one deity. The Brahmanacchahsin is the middle as 
this organ of generation ; therefrom two forms arise, female and male ; 
therefore the Brahmanacchahsin at the third pressing recites (verses) to two 
deities. The Brahmanacchahsin recites most (verses) ; the Brahmanac- 
chahsin is the body ; therefore this middle of the body is the thickest, 
xxviii. 10. In that the strophes and the antistrophes contain (the word) 

2 RV. viii. 38. 7 ; ^9®* Stellingm Issued with l[ier Jaimintya frauta 

® See 99^* Sutra). 

' See 99®* 8 with Anartlya's comm. xxviii. 9. ^ AB. vi. 4 differs wholly from this 

* See Anartlya on 99*^- ^ where the account. 

verses are given. ® This sense of vend sevant seems to follow from 

' apajighndte (so M) is impossible, and AB. i. 20. 2 and iii. 37. 2, though vend 

obviously ^jaghndte must be read, as has escaped the dictionaries, 

suggested by B. Gaastra (no. x of her 



519] The Morning Recitations of the Hotrakas [ — xxix. i 

‘ hither this is a symbol of the first day. The strophes of the Maitravaruna 
and the Achavaka are by Vi^vamitra/ the two nine-versed conclusions by 
Vasistha^ ; verily thus they two make the two ends alike. Having recited 
the strophes, they make as the antistrophes the strophes of the next day, 
to secure the form of the Ahina, for the continuity of the Ahina ; verily 
thus they make day conformable to day ; day indeed is conformable to 
day. They say ‘ Why is the Stotra followed in recitation ? Why do they 
recite beyond the Stoma?* That is not indeed sung which is not followed 
in recitation; that Stoma goes not to the gods which is not recited 
beyond ; ‘ therefore is the Stotra followed in recitation ; therefore do they 
recite beyond the Stoma. The Qastras have four calls ; the litanies are 
cattle ; cattle are fourfold ; moreover they are four-footed ; verily (they 
serve) to obtain cattle. The offering verses of the litanies are from the 
one-day (rite) ; the one-day (rite) is a support ; verily (it serves) for support. 
They say the second vamt, for the healing of the libations, for the support 
of the libations. 


ADHYAYA XXIX 
The Soma Sacrifice (continued). 

The Recitation of the Hotrakas at the Midday Pressing. 

xxix. 1. When the gods at Sarvacaru performed the sacrifice, Arbuda 
Kadraveya came up to them at the midday (pressing) and said to them, 
‘ One Hotr*s office is not being performed for you, that of the Gravastut ; lot 
me perform it for you, do ye invite me.’ They said ‘So be it ’ ; they 
invited him ; he saw these appropriate (verses) of the Gravastut, namely, 
^ Let them call forth ; let us call forth,’ when they call forth, ^ for they call 
forth indeed ; then when (they say) ‘mightily mightily’ (the verse containing 
‘mightily’ is used), ‘They speak out mightily^ with the strong exhilarat- 
ing (drink) ’ ; ‘ Set free the thought of him that hath pressed ’ (is the 
verse) when they set free.^ They are fourteen ; the fingers are ten, the 
pressing stones are four; they make up this (number). They are Jagati 
verses; the stones are connected with the Jagati. In that he concludes 


1 RV. iii. 62. 16-18 and iii. 12. 1-3 ; seo 99 S. 
xii. 1. 3 and 5. 

« RV. vii. 66. 7 9 and vii. 94. 7-9 ; 99 S. xii. 
2. 4, and 8. 

® Soe 9?®* 2. 10 with Anartlya’s comm. ; 

AB. VI. 8. In AB. vi. 6, 17 the use of 
strophe and antistrophe is dealt with, 
xxix. 1. ^ The Arbuda hymn is RV. x. 94 ; 
see 95®* vi. 1, 2 ; Ldvi, 


La docti’inc du sacrijtce^'p'p, 142, 143 ; Caland 
and Henry, VAgnistomay pp. 269 seq, 

2 The verses are appropriate to the actions 

described as the part of the stones and 
the priests. For ya;tra brhat see 95®* vii. 
15. 11 ; RV. X. 94. 4. The action of the 
pressers is referred to ; the verse is to be 
used when they say brhad brhat. 

3 RV. X. 94. 14 c. 



[620 


xxix. 1 — ] The Soma Sacrifice 

with a Tristubh/ thereby at the midday (pressing) is the Tristubh secured. 
He praises, standing ; the stones stand as it were. He praised wearing a 
turban, and with eyes tied up ; therefore now also wearing a turban (the 
priest) praises the stones. Moreover they say ‘ The eye came ® ; it was 
a serpent; thus did poison come to the priests; he used these (verses) 
connected with (Soma) the purifying,® and repelling poison, in praise ; in 
that he uses these (verses) connected with (Soma) the purifying and 
repelling poison, verily (it serves) for the healing of the sacrifice and the 
curing of the sacrificers.’ 

xxix. 2. When the Pavamana has been sung, they proceed with the pot 
of milk, for this is the time for it ; moreover (it serves) to secure the sap of 
the pressing. Then they proceed with the sacrifice of five oblations ; the 
explanation of this has been given. (Verses) by Vasistha^ he repeats for 
(the goblets) being filled at the midday (pressing) ; Vasistha it was who 
proclaimed the Soma to Indra at the midday. They contain (the words) 
‘ hither ’ and ' bay steeds with the symbols of the invitatory verses. They 
are Tristubh verses to Indra, for the midday pressing is connected with 
Indra and the Tristubh. Ten he recites; ten goblets do they fill here. 
Then the Hotrakas sacrifice together; the explanation of this has been 
given. Tristubh verses to Indra they use as offering verses for the 
Prasthitas at the midday (pressing), for the midday pressing is connected 
with Indra and the Tristubh. They say the second vamt, for the healing 
of the libations, for the support of the libations. Then comes the sacrificial 
food, then the goblet of the Hotr ; the explanation of this has been given ; 
when the Daksina offerings have been made,^ the sacrificial fees are taken ; 
the explanation of these has been given. He recites (a verse) by Vi$va- 
mitra ^ as the invitatory verse for the cup for the Maruts ; the explanation 
of this has been given. 

xxix. 3. The^ Prstha for the Maitravaruna is the Vamadevya; the 
Vamadevya is healing and medicine ; verily thus are healing and medicine 
produced in the sacrifice. That of the Brahmanaechahsin is the Naudhasa ; 
that has a finale ; the finale is a support ; verily (it serves) for support. 
That of the Achavaka is the Kaleya ; that they perform as the Aida on 
Brhati verses ; the sacrificial food is cattle ; the Brhati is cattle ; cattle are 
connected with the Brhati ; verily (it serves) to obtain cattle. They recite 

^ RV. X. 94. 14. ritual is the same ns in the first pressing ; 

® M has caktur hdhay K cakaur hdsa. The see 95^. vii. 16, 17. Cf. AB. vi. 11. 

sense is dubious, but apparently the idea ^ See 99^* 

is the eye was an evil eye. * RV. iii. 61. 7 ; 99®* 

« 99 s. vii. 16. 16. xxix. 3. ^ For the Sfimans, Ac., see 99®* 

^ No iti at the end. 22-24. Lindner has Aida, and so 

* RV. vii. 21 ; see 99®* ^'^* throughout, where AB. has I, 



621] 


[ — xxix. 6 


The Litanies of the Hotrahas 


the Pragathas of the Saman ; thus they depart not from the Hotr’s rule. 
The beginnings of the litanies of the Maitravaruna and Achav&ka are of five 
verses, the conclusions are of eleven verses ; verily thus they make the two 
ends alike. The Maitravaruna recites (verses) by Vi 9 vamitra ^ and 
Vamadeva/ for his conclusion is by Vamadeva. The Brahmanacchansin 
recites (verses) by Vi 9 vamitra^ and Vasistha,® for his conclusion is by 
Vasistha. The Achavaka recites (verses) by Bharadvaja ® and Vi 9 vamitra/ 
for his conclusion is by Vi 9 vamitra. They recite (verses) by four Rsis ; up 
to four (degrees) are pairing, union, propagation ; (they serve) for generation.® 
The beginnings of the litanies of the Maitravaruna and Brahmanacchan sin 
are by Vi 9 vamitra, and so is the conclusion of the Achavaka ; Vi 9 vamitra 
is speech ; verily thus with speech on all sides they extend the sacrifice. 
This is the explanation of the introductory and concluding rites and of the 
one day form. 

xxix. 4. Day by day the Prstha for the Maitravaruna is the Vamadevya ; 
the Vamadevya is healing and medicine ; verily thus are healing and 
medicine day by day produced in the sacrifice. Then day by day they 
recite these Pragathas containing (the word) ‘ who ’ ; Prajapati is Who ; 
verily thus day by day they continue finding support in Prajapati. 
Moreover they continue employing the varied hymns, the Ahinas (by name), 
unappeased; verily they continue to appease them day by day with the 
Pragathas ^ containing (the word) ‘ who ’. Then these regular Tristubh 
verses are recited day by day as the strophes of the litanies ; the Tristubh 
is might and strength ; verily thus day by day they continue finding 
support in might and strength. ‘ (Drive) all our enemies away, O Indra,’ 
the Maitravaruna^ (recites) this verse by Sukirti, containing (the word) 
‘ drive away *, for the driving away of the evil. By the same Rsis as are 
the two hymns are the two beginnings of the litanies of the other two. 
‘ Those yoked with prayer I yoke with prayer * and * Lead us to a wide 
space, wise one * are the beginnings ^ of the litanies, containing (the words) 
' prayer * and ' wide ' ; verily thus day and day they continue finding support 
in the prayer and in the wide goer. 

xxix. 5. Then the Qilpas ^ are recited in the middle three days, for the 


* RV. iii- 48 ; 99®* ^ Kwrutah. 

» RV. iv. 19 ; 99s. vii. 22. 6. 

* RV. iii. 84 ; 99S. vii. 23. 6. He allows also 

the ^yAit& on a Brhatprstha. 

« RV. vii. 28 ; 99S. vii. 23. 8. 

« RV. vi. 80 ; 99S. vii. 24. 4. 

7 RV. iii. 86 ; 99S. vii. 24. 6. 

* See above KB. iii. 9 ; vii. 10. 

< See 99s. vii. 22. 8; 28. 5; 24. 8, forfthe 


originals and for the new ones of the 
second two, xii. 4. 1 ; 5. 1. 

* RV. X. 131. 1 ; 99s. xii. 3. 6. 

8 RV. iii. 35. 4 and vi. 47. 8 ; 99S. xii. 4. 2 ; 
5. 2. 

xxix. 5. ^ See for other ^* 

For the ritual see 99®* ^* 

Here the 9 ^^Pas triplets recited on 
the three days of the second tnad of the 
Dvftda^ftha. For the verses cf. AB. vi. 19 . 


00 [11.0.8. as] 



[522 


xxix. 6 — ] The Soma Sacrijice 

middle (set of) three days contains the Qilpas. Viraj * verses and verses by 
Vimada (are used) on the first day, for the fourth day is connected with 
the Viraj. Pankti and great Pankti ® verses (are used) on the fifth day, for 
the fifth day is connected with the Pankti. Atichandas* verses (are used) 
on the sixth day, for the sixth day is connected with the Atichandas. 
Moreover' that which is performed without the Brhati is not a Prstha ; the 
Prsthas here fall away from the Brhati; verily thus day by day they 
continue finding support in the ^ilpas- Moreover the middle (set of) three 
days is the atmosphere ; the atmosphere is without base or support ; verily 
thus day by day they continue finding support in the Qilpas. They are 
triplets; the Qilpa is threefold, dancing, music, and singing. Verily thus 
day by day they continue finding support in them. ‘ Praise nought else ’ 
and ‘ Let us not fear, let us not be troubled ’ is the Prstha for the Maitra- 
varuna® on the tenth day by Medhatithi, for his Prstha is not performed 
on Brhati verses before the tenth day ; prosperity is solitary ; the Brhati is 
prosperity ; verily thus at the end he finds support in prosperity. Having 
recited (verses) of two Padas,® they recite (the hymn) of the one day (rite) ; 
the one day (rite) is a support ; the tenth day is a support ; (the verses) of 
two Padas are the metre in which support can be found ; verily (they 
serve) for support. 

xxix. 6. The Naudhasa is (the Prstha) for the Brahmanacchansin ; the 
explanation of this has been given. In Gayatri ^ verses they give the lead 
for the Brahmanacchansin on the sixth day with the symbol of the Baivata, 
of the day, to secure the form of the Ahinas, for the continuity of the 
(thinking) ‘ Undiminished (ahinan) we secure all desires,’ for here is 
nothing taken away. ‘ Prayers they have offered up through seeking 
glory’ is the conclusion* day by day; the ‘ Prayers up’ hymn is the 
seasons; verily thus day by day they continue finding support in the 
seasons. They are six (verses) ; the seasons are six ; verily thus day by 
day they continue finding support in the seasons. 

xxix. 7. The Kaleya is (the Prstha) for the Achavaka ; the explanation 
of this has been given. In (verses) of six Padas * they give the lead to the 
Achavaka on the sixth day, with the symbol of the sixth day. ‘ Having 
with thought, like a carpenter, a hymn ’ is the conclusion * day by day ; the 

^ RV. vii. 81. 10-12 ; x. 28. 1-3 ; 99 S. xii. 8. 8; • ?QS. xii. 8. 23 ; 4. 24 ; 6. 23. 

ibr ttie other two priests see 4. 10 ; 6. 9. ^ I. e. the Stotriya and Anurupa on RV. i. 4. 

LoK read vai madhyaa and so Anart. on 1 -0 ; th(^ Raiyata is also in G&yatr!) i. 30. 

99 s. xii. 3. 8 as ed. by Hillebrandt. 13-16 ; viii. 2. 18-16. 

3 99 s. xii. 3. 10 ; 4. 18 ; 5. 12. * Sec 99 S. xii. 6. 3 ; RV. vii. 23. 

^ 99 s. xii. 8. 12; 4. 16; 6. 16 (one triplet xxix. 7. ' RV. viii. 99. 1, 2 ; 66. 7, 8 ; 9fS« 
each). xii. 6. 4. 

5 RV. viii. 1. i, 2 ; 4 7, 8 ; 99 S. xii. 3. 22. * See 99 S. xii. 6. 3; RV. iii. 38. 1-8. 



623] 


2%e Litanies of the Hotrakas [ — ^xxix. g 

‘ carpenter like ’ hymn is Prajapati ; verily thus they continue day by day 
finding support in Prajapati. That (hymn) has no (deity) mentioned ; Pra- 
japati is he (whose name is) not mentioned ; verily thus they continue day 
by day finding support in Prajapati. There is one (verse) alone ® with (the 
deity) expressed ; Prajapati is one alone ; verily thus they continue day by 
day finding support in Praj&pati. Of them the following are unchanged, 
the Maitravaruna’s Prstha, and the conclusions of the other two ; verily thus 
they continue day by day finding support in them. 

xxix. 8. It is of ten verses * ; these breaths are ten ; verily thus he places 
these breaths in the sacrifice and in the sacrificers ; the midday (perform- 
ances) of the Hotrakas consist of two hymns, to counterpoise the Hotr’s 
two litanies. Moreover, the Hotr is the year, the Hotrakas the seasons ; in 
that the seasons being united in couples are called summer, the rains, and 
winter, therefore the midday (performances) of the Hotrakas consist of two 
hymns. Moreover, the Hotr is the body, the Hotrakas the limbs ; in that 
the limbs are twofold, therefore the midday (performances) of the Hotrakas 
consist of two hymns. Having recited at the morning pressings the over 
recitation of the Stomas, they recite the Ahina * h 3 nnns at the midday 
(pressings) on the Caturvin^a, Abhijit, Visuvant, Vi^vajit and Mahavrata 
days, for these days * are not deficient. Having recited the Ahina hymns 
(on these days) those of the one day (rite) they recite. These days are 
turned away and not returning ; in that having recited the Ahina hymns, 
they recite those of the one day (rite), and the one day (rite) is a support, 
verily (they serve) for support. Five hymns each time the Maitravaruna 
recites in all the Chandomas * ; the Chandomas are cattle ; cattle are five- 
fold : verily (they serve) to obtain cattle. Four each the Brahmanacchansin 
and the Achavaka ; the Chandomas are cattle ; cattle are fourfold and also 
four-footed ; verily (they serve) to obtain cattle. The ^astras have five calls ; 
the litanies are cattle ; cattle are fivefold ; verily (they serve) to win cattle. 
The ofiering verses of the litanies are from the one day (rite) ; the one day 
(rite) is a support ; verily (they serve) for support. They say the second 
vasat, for the healing of the libations, for the support of the libations. 

^ RV. hi. 38. 10. and, in view of the parallelism of AB. vL 

^ See RV. iii. 38. 18, ahlndni must be read. Cf. KB. xii. 2, 

2 For these cf. AB. vi. 18 ; ^J^S. xii, 6. 7 ; viz. n. 4. 

RV. iv, 16 ( 95 s. xii. 3. 13) ; i, 61 (xii. 4. ^ 95®* 17-19 for the five ; the others 

17) ; iii. 31 (xii. 5. 17). have the normal number of four, but with 

^ ahimh (also in M) is strange in the masc. ; variants. 



XXX. 1 — ] 


The Soma Sacrijice 


[524 


ADHYAYA XXX 
The Soma Sacrijice {continued) 

TM Litanies of the Hotrahas at the Third Pressing. 

•yYT. 1. The morning pressing is the Vasus’, the midday pressing the 
Rudras’, the third pressing the Adityas*. In that he begins the third press- 
ing with the Aditya cup, verily thus he begins with its own deity. More- 
over, the third pressing is a pressing which has the sap sucked out ; the 
Aditya cup is a cup rich in sap ; verily thereby he makes the third^press- 
ing rich in sap. He recites a Tristubh as invitatory verse for the Aditya 
cup ; the explanation of this has been given. Then, when the Pavamana 
has been sung, they proceed with the animal victim, for this is the time for 
it ; moreover (it serves) to confer sap on the pressing. Then they proceed 
with the sacrifice of five oblations ; the explanation of this has been given. 
He recites (verses) by Vamadeva * at the third pressing for (the goblets) 
being filled, for Vamadeva it was who proclaimed the Soma toindraatthe 
third pressing. They contain (the words) ‘ hither ’ and ‘ bay steed with 
the symbol of the invitatory verses ; they are Tris^ubhs addressed to India 
and the Rbhus ; verily thus he makes Indra a half -sharer in the pressing. 
Nine he recites ; ten goblets do they fill here, but the concluding is as the 
introductory rite. The Hotrakas sacrifice together ; the explanation of this 
has been given. The offering verses* are Jagatl verses, containing (the 
words) ‘draught’, ‘be drunk’, and ‘drunk’, for the third pressing is connected 
with the Jagati ; they contain (the word) ‘ be drunk ’, for the third pressing 
contains (the word) ‘ be drunk ’. They say a second vosat for the healing of 
the libations, for the support of the libations. Then comes the sacrificial 
food,® then the Hotr’s goblet ; the explanation of this has been given. Then 
they offer the cakes (for the Pitrs) at the third pressing ; the explanation 
of these has been given. Then they proceed with the cup for Savitr * ; the 
explanation of this has been given. He recites one Tristubh as invitatory 
verse for the cup for Savitr ; the explanation of this has been given. Again 
in that between the two litanies the Agnidh says the offering verses for the 
cup for the wives,® thereby the two reach the Hotr. 

* KV. iv, 86; see 95S. viii. 2. 8. Jagati. This precedes the Vai^vadeva 

2 g9S. viii. 2. 6 seq. ^astra. 

s 99s. viii. 2, 18. ® I. e. between the Vai9vadeva and the Agni- 

* 99s. viii. 8. 2 gives the Tristubh as RV. iv, mftruta 9a9trfls ; see Galand and Henry, 

54. i, which is given in the Aniikramani as VAgnittomUf p, 366. 



625] 


The Litanies of the Hotrakas [ — xxx. 4 

XXX. 2. The litanies of the Ukthya are addressed to Indra and Agni ; the 
explanation of these has been given. These to Indra in Jagati they recite 
day by day ' ; the Jagati is cattle ; cattle are connected with the Jagati; 
verily (they serve) to obtain cattle. ‘ These should be unchanged ’ some 
state, saying ‘ These are the supporters of the pressing.’ But the rule is 
‘ They should be varied,’ for one day, then another, they approach. (Reci- 
tations) to Varuna, to Brhaspati, and to Visnu they recite; their metre is 
the Jagati ; Indra’s the Tristubh ; in that the metres are inverted, it is to 
secure the characteristic of the deities. (Recitations *) to Indra and Varuna, 
to Indra and Brhaspati, to Indra and Visnu they recite ; verily with these 
they accompany the cups, for so are the cups drawn. 

xxx. 8. ‘ Holder of the people, the generous, worthy of praise’ the Maitra- 
varuna ^ (says) ; the explanation of this has been given. The conclusion * 
is by Vasistha day by day ; Vasistha saw the third pressing for the Maitra- 
varuna’s function ; therefore day by day the conclusion is by Vasistha. In 
Kakubh verses they give the lead to the Maitravaruna ® on the third day ; 
thereby he falls into the power of the Brahmanacchansin. On the fourth 
day they give the lead to each in his own metre ; verily thus each in his 
own metre they continue finding support. In Gayatrl verses * they give 
the lead to the Maitravaruna, in Usnih verses to the Brahmanacchansin, in 
Auus^ubh verses to the Achavaka, to secure a progressive increase. So their 
metres increase with four syllables each. In Pankti verses * they give the 
lead to the Maitravaruna on the fifth day, for the fifth day is connected 
with the Pankti ; in (verses) of two Padas ® they give the lead on the sixth 
day, for the sixth day is connected with (verses) of two Padas. Moreover 
they perform the Samans, Gurda, Bhadra, Udvan 9 aputra ; moreover the 
Qilpas are accompanied by (verses) of two feet ; therefore here the ^ilpas 
are recited, (thinking) ‘ Let us not depart from the Qilpas.’ 

xxx. 4. With the Nabhanedistha^ the Hotr sprinkles seed ; it he hands to 
the Maitravaruna ; it he develops with the Valakhilyas ; these Valakhilyas 
he recites as divided ; by Padas the first two hymns he divides ; verily thus 


^ See Anartlya on 99^* ^ 

AB. yi. 15, and 14. 

2 See RV. vii. 82 ( 99 S. xii. 11. 15) ; x. 48 
(ibid. 12. 6) ; vi. 69. 1-8 (ibid. 26. 5) for the 
seyeutl) day ; for the offering verses 99®* 
ix. 2. 6 ; 3. 8 ; 4. 7, on the Ukthya ; for 
the litanies, x. 2. 4 ; 8. 4 ; 4. 6. 

xxx. 8. 1 RV. iii. 51. 1-8 ; 99 S. ix. 2. 8. 

2 RV. vii. 84. 1-8 (99S. ix. 2. 5 ; xii. 10. 5) 
85. 1 - 8 ; 99 s. xii. 10 6. 

2 99 s. xii. 10. 7 ; RV. viii. 103. 8, 9 ; 19. 80, 


81. See 99®* ^^^* ^^* ^ similar 

vei’ses. 

* Quoted summarily by Anartiya on 99®* 
xii. 10. 9 ; 12. 9 (ix. 8. 2 ) ; see also xii. 
26. 7. 

5 99 s. xii. 10. 12. 

« 99 s. xii. 11. 1. 

’ For these cf. Ind. Stud, iii. 224, 226, 209; 
PB. xiii. 12. 6 serj, 

xxx. 4. ^ RV. X. 61 ; see 99®* *“* ^1* > 

for the Valakhilyas cf. AB. vi. 27, 28. 



XXX. 4 1 


[626 


The Soma Sacrifice 

by joints he gathers him together ; by half verses the second two ; man 
consists of two portions ; verily thus he unites them ; verse by verse the 
third two hymns ; verily thus he gathers him whole ; he should invert in 
the Nara9ahsa ^ ; therefore foetuses are bom inverted. 

XXX. 5. In the Tarksya^ he mounts the difficult mounting; Tarksya is 
Vayu ; V§,yu is breath verily thus he places breath in him ; him he hands 
over to the Brahmanacchansin. Him he receives in the womb of the Sukirti 
(hymn ; for him born he recites in Pahkti form with repetition of o the 
Vrsakapi ® (hymn) ; the repetition of o is food ; verily thus bom he finds 
support in proper food. Then he recites the Kuntapa ^ according to the 
metres, for the obtaining of all desires ; viz. the Nara^ansis,® the Raibhis,® 
the Karavyas,*^ the Indragathas,^ the Bhutechads,® the Pariksit verses,^® 
and the prattle of Eta5a.^^ Eta9a, the sage, saw the life of the sacrifice. 
He said to his sons ' My boys, I have seen the life of the sacrifice ; that 
I shall prattle forth ; think me not mad.’ They said ‘ Be it so.’ Then he 
prattled it forth ; his eldest son, creeping up, stopped his mouth, (saying) 
‘ Our father has become mad.’ To him he said ‘ Be gone ; fie on thee, 
O fool ; I make thine offspring the worst ; hadst thou not, O fool, stopped 
my mouth, I had made the cow of a hundred (years of) life, and man of 
a thousand.’ Therefore the descendants of Eta^a being the Ajaneyas are 
the worst of the Bhrgus, for they are under curse by a father, their own 
deity, their own Prajapati.^^ 

XXX. 6. (The verses) of the Adityas and Angirases ^ he recites next. The 
Adityas and the Angirases were at variance, ‘ We shall go first to the world 


2 RV. X. 12. 

1 RV. X. 178 ; see xii. 11. 12. 

' RV. X. 131 ; see 99 S. xii. 13. 1. Cf. AB. vi. 
29; jdtam represents an elliptical clause. 

2 RV. X. 86 ; see 59^. xii. 13. 1, where the 

form of the Nyunkha is given. 

< RV. XX. 127-36 ; see 99 S. xii. 13. 7 ; AB. 
vi. 32, 33. 

8 RV. XX. 127. 1-3 ; see ffS. xii. 14 ; RVKh. 

V. 8. 

« RV. XX. 127. 4-6 ; see 99 S. xii. 16. 1 ; 14. 4, 

5, where see Hillebrandt's crit. notes ; 
RVKh. V. 9. 

^ RV. XX. 127. 11-14 ; see 99®* J 

RVKh. V. 11 

8 AV. XX. 128. 12-16 ; see 99 S. xii. 16. 6 ; 

16. 1 ; RVKh. v, 14. 

® AV. XX. 136. 11-18 ; see 99®* ^ii* 1®* 

6, 8; RVKh. v. 21. 

>0 AV. XX. 127. 7-10 ; see 99 S. xii. 16. 2 ; 

17. 1. 1-4 ; RVKh. v. 10. 


AV. XX. 129 ; see 99 S. xii. 18 ; RVKh. 
V. 16. The story is given also in AB. 
vi. 33. 

^2 BOoLK and the Anand. ed. have the 
absurd adar^at. 

^2 BLK have apilaldpa. 

Go and the Anand. ed. have abhijagrdhay 
which is, no doubt, correct. 

18 M. has needlessly karitydmi. 

18 The exact force of these words which are 
probably best taken as in apposition to 
pitrdy who can be regarded as their 
prajajxUij is uncertain. The curse was not 
by any deity apparently. The alternative 
is to connect with the next clause, but 
that is unlikely. 

XXX. 6. 1 AV. XX. 136. 6 seq . ; see 95®* J 

RVKh, V. 20 ; AB. vi. 84 has a much 
longer version for which cf. Oaland, Jai- 
mtnlya Brdhmanay pp. 168-61, and 95®* 
xiv. 40 has a variant version. 



627] 


The Litanies of the Hotrakas [— xxx. 8 

of heaven ’ (said) the Aditya ; * we * the Ahgirases. The Afigirases sent to 
the Adityas (saying) ‘ Ours is the pressing day to-morrow ; do ye cause us 
to sacrifice/ Agni was their envoy ; the Adityas said ‘ Ours is the pressing 
day to-day ; and thou art the Hotr for us here, Brhaspati the Brahman, 
Ayasya the Udgatr, Ghora Angirasa the Adhvaryu/ Them they rejected ; 
him they desired to please with these (verses); thus they repeat these 
(verses). They brought a white horse as sacrificial fee,® that one which here 
gives heat ; therefore the Adityas went to heaven ; he goes to heaven who 
knows thus. 

xxx. 7. He recites the orderings of the quarters ^ ; the quarters are in 
order for him. He recites the man-ordering (verses) ^ ; men are in order for 
him. He says the riddles,® the Pratiradhas,^ the Ativada,® the Ahanasyas,® 
all forms of speech. Therefore a man speaks all forms of speech, but other 
animals one only. They are eight ; by them the gods attained all attain- 
ments ; so verily also the sacrificers by them attain all attainments. ‘ The 
Kaprth, O men, the Kaprth extend,* and ‘ What time forward ye came * are 
two (verses ^) ; thus they become perfect ®. They make up ten ; the Viraj 
consists of sets of ten; the Viraj is prosperity and proper food; verily 
(they serve) to obtain the Viraj as prosperity and proper food. 

xxx. 8. He recites the Dadhikra (verse ^) ; the Dadhikra (verse) is speech ; 
verily thus he places speech in him ; he recites (the verses) to Soma the 
purifying ^ ; (the verses) to Soma the purifying are a filter ; verily thus he 
purifies him. Him he hands over to the Achavaka; him he with the 

* hofasi is made certain (against hotdsa in regards as the Pravalhika AV. xx. 134, 

BLK and Anand. ed.) by the parallels which in AB. is the Ajijhasenyas(RVKh. 

9B. iii. 5. 1. 13-17 ; GB. ii. 6. 14. For v. 17) ; the confusion seems to have 

^i^iksuh cf. Nir, ii. 10 ; ‘ present ^ (BR.) arisen from the omission of that special 

is here impossible. category. The statement of the Vedic 

3 daksind in the Anand. ed. is a mere error : Concordance that Pravalhika applies to 

ahhivadantak in OoK is an easier reading, AV. xx. 134 is erroneous, as is Scheftelo- 

but with te following is not probable. witz’s view, ZDMG. lix. 425. 

1 AV. XX. 128. 1-5; ggS. xii. 20. 2; RVKh. AV. xx. 135. 1-3; see 99S. xii. 23, 2; 

V. 12. RVKh. v. 18; Pratiradba in AB. vi. 33. 

2 AV. XX. 128. 6-11 ; see 99 S. xii. 21. 2. 1-6 ; » AV. xx. 135. 4 ; see 99 S. xii. 28. 4 ; RVKh. 

RVKh. V. 13. V. 19 ; Ativada in AB. vi. 33. 

s AV. XX. 133. 1-4 must be meant ; see 99 S. « AV. xx. 136 ; see 99 S. xii. 24. 1 ; RVKh. 

xii. 21. 3 ; in xii. 22 are given all six v. 22. 

verses of that hymn (cf. RVKh. v. 16), no ^ RV. x, 101. 12 and x. 165. 4; see 99 S. xii. 
doubt the last two in error, and some 24. 2. 

add the seventh verse, probably because ® dndksipyah is apparently corrupt ; the word 
they thought that 22 contained the rendered is andksepydhf which, however, 

seven (4 and 3) verses of 99^* is not at all probable as a correction. 

AB. vi. 33 the number six is probably xxx. 8. ^ RV. iv. 39. 6 ; see 99®* 26. 1. 

meant as is accepted by Sayana. Per contra Cf. AB. vi. 36. 

Anartlya ignores the whole of 22 and * RV. ix. 101. 4-6 ; 99®* ^ii* 25. 2 ; AB. vi. 36. 



XXX. 8 — ] 


[628 


The Soma Sacrifice 

Evayamarut (hymn^) makes to move when bom; he repeats o; stumbling as 
it were one moves when first desirous to walk ; verily thus from the immortal 
metre he propagates him for immortality ; they obtain immortality who 
perform the sixth day (rite). Having recited the strophe and antistrophe, 
he recites the Valakhilyas; the strophe and antistrophe are the body, the 
Valakhilyas the breaths ; these breaths are not separated (from the body) . 
They say ‘ Why are they (called) Valakhilyas ? * That which is not in contact 
in two fields,^ they call Khila ; these breaths are a hair (vdla) in breadth and 
are not separated ; therefore are they Valakhilyas. 

XXX. 9. ‘ In the Tarkaya he mounts the difficult mounting,' it has been 
said.^ In Gayatri verses they give the lead for the Brahmanacchafisin on 
the second day, thereby he falls into the power of the Maitravaruna. ‘ For- 
ward to the most generous, the great, born of great wealth ' is a six verse 
(hymn ^), twice as great as that of the Maitravaruna. The conclusion day 
by day is by Krsna®; Krsna Angirasa saw this third pressing for the 
Brahmanacchansin's office ; therefore day by day the conclusion is by Ensna. 
In Anustubhs they give the lead for the Achavaka on the third day; 
thereby he falls into the power of the Brahmanacchansin. The ‘season 
mother ' (hymn ^) has thirteen verses ; it is twice as great as that of 
the Brahmanacchansin and there is one verse over. The conclusion day 
by day is by Bharadvaja®; Bharadvaja saw this third pressing for the 
Achavaka's office ; therefore day by day the conclusion is by Bharadvaja. 
The Achavaka alternates the two Visnu (hymns ®), the conclusions the other 
two. The Maitravaruna and the Brahmanacchansin have two conclusions ; 
the Achavaka has one conclusion. In that the Achavaka has an unchang- 
ing conclusion, the Achavaka is a support ; verily (it serves) for support. 

XXX. 10. Thirty-six (verses) the Maitravaruna recites at the Caturvin9a,^ 
forty the Brahmanacchansin, and forty-four the Achavaka. These are 
a hundred and twenty. A hundred and twenty are the days of the season ; 
thus he obtains the season, with the season the year and the desires that 
are in the year. Five hymns the Maitravaruna recites on all the Chan- 
doma days; the Chandomas are cattle; cattle are fivefold; verily (they 
8 RV. V. 87 ; see 99 S. xii. 26. 10 ; AB. vi. 30 ; and Anurupa are RV. viii. 92. 28>30 ; i. 

the rendering of nyunkhamdnaka in JAOS. 8. 8-10 ; 99®* 

xxxi. 831 is erroneous. * RV. x. 42. 1-3 and 43. 1-3 ; see 99®* 12. 

* See Pischel and Geldner, Ved. Stud. ii. 205 ; 5 and 6. 

Oldenbei^, fgveda-Noten, i. 385, 886. The ^ RV. ii. 18 ; see 99 S. xii. 26. 22. For the 

idea seems to be that the space between Stotriya and Anurupa see RV. i. 11. 1-8; 

the fields in which they do not come into 8. 6, 7 ; 99®* *^^* ^6. 1. 

contact is the Khila, as Oldenberg takes ® RV. vi. 69 1-3 ; see 99®* *“* 2^* ®* 

it, but the word asavhbhinna is very curi* * RV. vii. 100 and i. 154. 1-6; see 99®* *^^* 

ous ; the comm, suggests * unploughed ^ 26. 2 and 8. 

^ Above KB. xxx. 5. xxx. 10. 1 See 99®* 27. 1 with Anartlya's 

a RV. i. 57 ; see 99 S. xii. 26. 4. The Stotriya note. 



629] 


[ XXX. 11 


The Litanies of the Hotrakas 

serve) to obtain cattle. Four hymns the Brahmanacchahsin ^ recites in the 
first Chandoma ; the Chandomas are cattle ; cattle are fourfold, and also 
fourfooted ; verily (they serve) to obtain cattle. Five hymns the AchS.vaka ® 
recites in the first Chandoma ; the Chandomas are cattle ; cattle are five- 
fold ; verily (they serve) to obtain cattle. Six (they recite) in the second 
and third ; the year has six seasons ; verily (they serve) to obtain the year. 
The ^astras have four calls ; the litanies are cattle ; cattle are fourfold, and 
also fourfooted; verily (they serve) to obtain cattle. On the sixth day 
that of the Maitravaruna has five calls ; the litanies are cattle ; cattle are 
fivefold ; verily (they serve) to obtain cattle. The offering verses of the 
litanies are from the one day (rite) ; the one day (rite) is a support ; verily 
(they serve) for support. They say the second vasat, for the healing of the 
libations, for the support of the libations. 

XXX. 11. Five metres they recite at night, Anustubh, Gayatri, Usnih, 
Tristubh and Jagati ; these are the metres of night. The night has five 
calls, and so the additional litany of the Vajapeya. ‘ The night goes beyond 
the Uktha;^ verily thus from metre to metre they call' Kausitaki used 
to say, to prevent sameness. In that he uses a Tristubh containing the 
word ‘ over the night ’ as invitatory verse for the Apvin litany * cup, (it is 
because) the Praisa contains (the word) ‘over the night’, for the Somas are left 
over the night. Moreover, the Tristubh is might and strength ; verily thus 
might and strength he places in the sacrificer. The additional litanies of the 
Aptoryama have four calls ; the litanies are cattle ; cattle are fourfold, and 
also fourfooted ; verily (they serve) to obtain cattle. They use as conclud- 
ing verses (verses) to the lord of the field, (thinking) ‘The field is this earth ; 
in it undepressed shall we find support at the end ’ ; verily thus in it 
undepressed do they find support at the end. In that the offering verses 
are Tristubhs containing (the word) ‘ over the night (it is) because the Somas 
are left over the night. Moreover, the Tristubh is might and strength ; 
verily thus might and strength he places in the sacrificer. They say the 
second vasat^ for the healing of the libations, for the support of the liba- 
tions. They then proceed with (the cup) for the yoker of the bays ; the 

2 See while the Vajapeya adds one to the 

^ See 99^* Soda 9 in. For dhvayanie the Anand. ed. 

^ The sense must be as indicated, hut aiigraha has ahdyante : the sense remains the same, 

is first found here in it. Ukihasya as read chandasaf chandasa is ambiguous, and may 

in the edd. with the MSS. is probably mean from metre to metre, i. e. as bridging 

thus to be taken of the number of calls, over the separation, or simply from each 

five against four. It is not sufficient to metre, but the former (ehandase) is 

assume the sense to be that the night seemingly better, 

has an extra XJktha, for in point of fact ^ See 99^* 
the night rite (i. e. the Atiratra) adds 12, 

67 [h.o.s.8#j 



XXX. 11 ] The Soma Sacrifice [530 

explanation of this has been given. He recites a Tristubh as invitatory 
verse for (the cup) for the yoker of the bays ^ ; the explanation of this has 
been given. In that he recites an invitatory verse ^ for the Atipraisa, (it is 
because) without strength is the Praisa which has no invitatory verse. 
Moreover there are invitatory verses in the case of (the cups) for two 
deities, and in the case of all the Pravsthitas ; therefore he recites an invita- 
tory verse for it. ‘ In that he recites an Atipraisa, verily thus he refers to 
the next day, verily thus they keep taking hold of the next day ’ Kausitaki 
used to say.^ 


» See RV. i. 177. 4 ; ^gs. x. 1. 10. 

* Both are given in ggS. x. 1. 1 J as RV. iii. 53. 5 (or 4) and iha mada ika maghavan, 
^ See KB. xxii. 2 ; xxvi. 11. 



