THE ATHARVAVEDA 

And The Gopatha Brahmana 


By 

MAURICE BLOOMFIELD 


with an introduction by, 

M. P. LAKHERA 

Lecturer, Sanskrit Department 
Uliivcrsity of Allal?ab^4. 



Published by 
Arslia Prabaskasi 

Head Office : B 3/321, Shiva la, Varanasi- i 
Branch : 91 New Laskar Line, Allahabad, 


First Edition 1899 (Strassburg) 

Second Edition 1975 

Price i Rs. 24.00 (Paperback) 

Rs* 28.00 (Library Edition) 


PniNTED AT' 

KliaTbaiidii Works 

39-A, Sheo Gharan Lai Road^ 
Allahabad*3. 



INTRODUCTION 


The Atharvavsda^ though the last one in the enumeration of the four 
Vedas, is of prime importance in delineating the institutional history of 
the Vedic people. While the first three Vedas — Rk, Saman and Tajus^ 
are mainly concerned with the hieretic sacrifices and reflect the religious 
ideas and belief of the Upper Strata of the Vedic Society, the Atharvaveda 
faithfully presents the private day-to-day life of the common masses. In 
the Atharvaveda are laid bare before our eyes the variety of customs and 
concepts current amongst the masses relating to birth and burial, love 
and marriage, hearth and home, field and cattle, caste rnd community, 
Government and politics, trade and commerce, arts and industry, magic 
and medicine, anatomy and astronomy, theosophy and cosmogony 
and many more things. Here we are not only faced with the benevolent 
powers of nature but also meet the malevolent ones, which exercised the 
minds of the simple Vedic folk. Side by side with sorcery, reminiscent 
of the primitive mind, are here preserved the philosophical hymns, more 
numerous than in any other Veda, which provide the basis for the later 
upanisadic thought. Thus the profound as well as the profane in Vedic 
civilization and culture are honestly depicted here. The Atharvcvada is, 
therefore, a priceless treasure, supplying reliable data of incalculable 
value to the ethnologist and to the historian of the social institutions of 
Vedic people. 

Critical work on the Atharvaveda was staited by Rudolf Von Roth 
(1821 — 95) of Tubingen University, the founder of Vedic Philology in 
Germany. He in collaboration with William Dwight Whitney (1827—94) 
edited the text of the Yamaha recension of the Atharvaveda Sarhhim^ 
which was published from Berlin in 1856. In India Shankar Pandurang 
Pandit edited the Yamaha recension of the Atharvaveda-SarhhitU "with X\\^ 
commentary of Sayana. It was published from Bombay in 4 volumes 
in 1895— 98* This Indian edition has the great merit of being based, 
not only on manuscripts available in India, but also on the oral tradition 
of the ^rotriyas. The other extant Paippaluda recension of the Atharvauia* 
SathhitU was discovered in Kashmir in a single birch*bark manuscript 
through the efforts of Roth, who in 1875 published an account ofits 



( ‘V ) 

discovery and its brief comparison with the ^amaka recension in a tract 
entitled ‘Der Atharvaveda in Kaschmir,’ Roth, being fully occupied with his 
labours on his great Patersburg lexicon, could not contribute more towards 
Atharvauic studies, but W. D. Whitney, the pioneer of Vedic studies in 
America and the first incumbant of the Chair of Sanskrit at the Yale 
University, which was created in 1854, continued his work on the Athar- 
I'OTrfllo and its ancillary literature. He edited and translated the ‘Atkarva- 
veda-PmisSkhya or Saunaktyn CaturadhySyikS’ in 1862 and published an 
‘Index Vefborun of the Athet’'vei7jcda’ in 1881 . He had begun translating the 
Atharvaveda-Sathhitn with critical notes in 1856, which was after his death 
revised and edited by C. R. Lanman and was published in two volumes in 
the Harvard Oriented Series in 1905. 


Maurice Bloomfield, the author of the present treatise, had received 
his first instructions in Sanskrit and also his inspiration to work on the 
Atharvaveda from Whitney at the Yale University in 1877, when he had 
joined that University as a graduate student. From there he had gone 
as Fellow to the Johns Hopkins University where he worked with G, R. 
Lanman and received the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy in June, 1879 . 
Immediately after this he had gone abroad to continue his studies in 
Germany. Here he studied Indie and particularly Vedic philology with 
Albrecht Weber, Hermann Oldenberg and Heinrich Zimmer and various 
branches of Indo-european philology with Johannes Schmidt, Ernst 
Windisch, George Curtius, Karl Brugmann and August leskien. Thus 
Bloomfield imbibed the best in the American and European traditions of 

Indo european and Vedic philology. He returned from Europe in 1881 
and was appointed Professor of Sanskrit and comperative Philology at 

the Johns Hopkins University, which position he occupied for forty-five 

yc£trs* 


O ,.1 of M. Bloomfield were spread over the vasi 

field of Indo-european philology, but from the very beginning he had 
made the interpretation of the Veda and particularly the Atharvamda hit 
special field of study. A complete bibliography of Ms works as well as 
a bio^aphical sketch may be found in the volume of ‘Studies in Honor oj 
(New Haven, 19^^^ group of his pupils. He« 
It s^s desirabk to mention briefly his chief works on Vedic and particu- 
ary t arvanic Philolc^y, fUs gfgt major work was an edition ol 



( ^ ) 

^ThekmHka-Sutraofthe Atharvaveda with extracts from the Commentaries of 
DUrila and Kehva^ published in the Journal of the American Oriental Society 
(JAOS) 5 New Haven, 1890. This was followed by his translation of the 
^Hymns of the Atharvaveda'^ with critical notes for the Sacred Books of the 
East Series (VoL Oxford, 1897). Then came this brilliant study on 
^The Atharvaveda and the Gopatha Brahman a"* which was published in the 
Grundries der indo^arischen Philogie und Alter turns kunde* in Strassburg in 
1899. His last publication on the Atharvaveda was the chromophotograhic 
reproduction of ^The Kashmirian Atharvaveda {School of the Paippaladas)% 
from the birch-bark manuscript in the university library of Tubingen. 
This excellent work was edited by himself and Richard Garbe and was 
published from Baltimore in three volumes in 1901. 

Bloomfieldi ^contributions to the interpretation of the Veda’ of which 
seven series were published in the years 1886 (first series in the 
American Journal of Philology, abbreviated AJP, 7,) 466jS', 1890 (second 
series AJP 12, 319 ff), 1891 (third series, JAOS, 15, 143 ff and fourth 
series AJP 12, 414 ff), 1894 (fifth series. JAOS, 16, 1 ff and sixth series 
ZDMG 48, 5^1 ff) and 1896 (seventh series, AJP 17, 399 ff) contain 
many of his articles on various aspects of vedic interpretation, A monu- 
mental contribution to vedic philology is his ^Vedic Concordance^ published 
in the Harvard Oriental Series^ VoL 10, 1906, which is an indispensable 
tool for investigation^ in the vast vedic literature. In his ^Religlmofthe 
Veda? (New York, 1908), Bloomfield has surveyed the evolution of the 
vedic religion from the Rgveda to the upanisads. Yet another great 
contribution of Bloomfield to the study of the Rgveda is his ^Rgveda 
Repetitions^ published in the Harvard Oriental Series^ Vols. 20 and 24 in 
1916* No less important is his last work on ^Vedic Variants^ carried out 
in collaboration with his former pupil Franklin Edgci ton of the Yale 
University, which was published after his death in three volumes in 
1930-34 by the linguistic Society of America. 

In the profuse notes added in the body of ^The Atharvaveda and 
the Gopatha Brahmaf}a\ Bloomfield has mentioned and taken stock of 
all the important work done on the Atharvaveda and its exegetical literature 
and has thus supplied an almost exhaustive bibliography of Atharvanic 
studies upto the year 1899. Since then much has been added to it. 
It will suffice here to pass in review the more important work that has 



( VI ) 


added to our knowledge of the Atharvanic literature, thought and 
culture. L. C. Barret started publishing the text of the ^Kashmirian 
Atharvaveda* in Roman characters with critical notes in JAOS in 1906 
serially and brought it to completion in 1940 when the American Oriental 
Society published it separately in book-form. Dr. Raghu Vira brought 
out a very carefully prepared edition of the ^Atharvaveda (f the PaippalEdas^ 
from Lahore in the Sarasvaii Vihara Series 1 (Books 143, 1936), IX 
(Books 14-18, 1940) and XII (Books 19-20 with indices, 1942). Avery 
important addition to our knowledge of the PaippalMa school of the 
Atharveveda is the recent discovery of a palm-leaf manuscript of the 
PalppalUda-SamhitU at Vasudebpur in Puri district in Orissa by Prof. 
Durga Mohan Bhattacharya of the Calcutta Sanskrit College. This 
manuscript, though incomplete, is in fairly good condition. Its great 
importance lies in the fact that it contains the initial portions of the 
Sailihita which are missing in the Tubingen manuscript and it actually 
begins with *$arii no debir abhistaye’ as was guessed by Prof. Roth in 
1875 in his tract ^Der Aiharvaveda in ICaschmirK This manuscript has 
since been critically edited by Prof. Bhattacharya and published by the 
Calcutta Sanskrit College (VoL I, 1964, Vol. II, 1970). 

In the field of the !?aunaka recension of the Atharvaneda, mention 
must first of all be made of the well-edited, carefully printed and cheaply 
priced edition of the ^Athawaveda-SathhiW brought out by Pandit b^ripsda 
Damodara Satvalekar from Swidhyaya Mandala, Aundh (now shifted to 
Para<Ji) in 1939. This edition has been well received and has since 
been reprinted several times. The Vijsvesvargnaxid Vedic Research 
Institute, Hoshiarpur published the ^Atharvaveda^ (Saunaka) with pada- 
patha and Sayaua’s commentary edited by Prof. Vishva Bandhu Shastri 
in its series Nos, 1347 in 1960-64. 

The Gopatha Bruhtnanaj the only Brahmana of the Atharvaveda has 
been translated into English with critical notes and an elaborate 
introduction by Dr. H. G. Patyal. This was submitted as a doctoral 
thesis to the Poona University in 1969. The translation deserves early 
pubiication. The ^Athareaveda Kausika Grhya Sutra^ with Hindi tram* 
lation was brought out by Sri U. N. Singh from Madhurpur in 1942. 
Mueb more important is th.t ^KauHka Sutta-Bmilabhmja^ published from 
Poona (1972), which is critically edited by such eminent scholars as 



( vH ) 


H, R. Diwekar, V, P* Limaye, R. N* Dandekar , C. G. Ka shikar and 
V. V. Bhide on the basis of a single codex which is here reproduced by 
offset process. The Vaimna Sutra was translated in German with critical 
notes by W. Caland in 1910 and a reprint of it was made by the Akademie 
of Amsterdom in 1968. An English translation of Hhe Vait&na Sutrp' 
with notes was ptiblished by Sri S. N. Ghoshal in the Indian Historical 
quarterly [nos. 34-36 ^ *Tke Vaitana iraufa Sutra with the Commentary 
called Aksypanuvidhi by Somaditya\ was edited by Prof. Vishva Bandhu, 
Bhirna Deva and Pitambar Datt, with English translation; variant read- 
ings and mantra and word indices and was published by the vi^vesvara- 
nanda vedic Research Institute, Hoshiarpur in 1967. This institute has 
also published various Anukramanis of the Alharvaveda’^^Atharvamda 
Puthnnukramanlf (1964), ^AtharvavediyU brhaUSarvanukramaniktl^ (1966) and 
*Alharvaveda-ni-devat iKhandonukrmanikS* (1970). 

Besides the progrees in the publication of critical editions of texts 
and commentaries, studies on different aspects of the Atharvavcda and its 
ancillary literature have also not legged behind. To mention only a few 
more important studies, Dina J. Kohlbrugge in his ^Atharvavcda Parisista 
uber Omina^ (Pub. Wageningen, 1938) has systematically presented 
passages from the Atharvaveda-Parishta bearing upon Omen and portents. 
Dr. B. R. Modak in his doctral thesis on ^A study of the Ancillary literature 
of the Atharvavcda with special reference to the Parisutas^ has critically surve- 
yed the pariiistas and also presented their text in Devanagari script, 
Dr. V, W. Karambelkar in his ^Atharvavedic Civilization* (Pub. Nagpur 
University, 1 959} has not only presented the Atharvavedic Civilization 
in all its aspects, but has also compared it with the Avestan Civilization 
and critically examined the Sumerian elements in the Atharveveda, Dr. 
(Mrs ) Maya Malaviya has presented the study of magic in the Athar- 
in comparison with magical elements in the other Vedas in her 
‘Atharvavcde ^aniipmtikarmatii^ (Pub. Varanaseya Sanskrit Visvavidyalaya 
1967). She has also discussed the relation between religion and magic 
and has examined the views of frazer and others in the light of the 
Atharvavcda. Articles on the different aspects of the Atharvaveda^ contri- 
buted to Indological Research Journals, are too numerous to be detailed 
here and can best be seen in the excellent ^Vedic Bibliography* compiled 
by R- N. Dandekar, of which three volumes have appeared so far— Vol. I, 
JKLarnatak Publishing House, Bombay? 1946 ; Vol. II, University of 



Poona^ 1961 and VoL III, Bandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Poona, 
1973. 

Despite this all-round progress in Atharvanic studies. Bloom field^s 
^The Atharvadeda and the Gopatha BrUhmana^ still remains the only standard 
work presenting an authoritative account of the Atharvanic literature in 
its various aspects. This valuable work was not available in the market 
for the last many decades The proprietors of the Arsha Prakashan 
deserve our heartfelt thanks and commendations for reprinting this much 
needed work. 


March 4, 1975 


M. P. Lakhera 



Encyclopedia of indo-Aryan research 

FOUNDED BY G. BOHLER, EDITED BY F. KIELHORN. 

VOL. II, PART 1, B. 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA 
AND THE GOPATHA-BRAHMANA 

BY 

MAURICE BLOOMFIELD. 


PART I THE ATHARVA-VEDA IN GENERAL. 

A. CHARACTER AND CHRONOLOGY OF THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 

S I. External comparison with the other Vedas. — The Atharva- 
Veda is a collection of 730 hymns containing some 6000 stanzas, divided 
into 20 books. About one sixth of the mass, including two entire books (i 5 
and 1 6), is written in prose, similar in style and language to the Brahmajgias ^ ; 
the rest is poetry in the usual Vedic metres. The latter, however, are handled 
with great freedom, often betraying either ignorance or disregard of the Vedic 
metrical canons as applied to the poetry of the Rig-Veda®. Genuine tradition 
as to the authorship of the hymns there is none; the hymns themselves are 
silent; the reports of the SarvanukramanikaS of the AV. are in this respect 
absolutely fatuous^ Unlike the Rik, Saman, and Yajus — the Vedas respectively 
of hymn of praise, chanted song, and sacrificial verses and formulas — the 
names of the AV. do not in the first place reflect the nature of the contents, 
or the manner of employment of its hymns. The name Brahma -Veda is very 
late, and does not in the main designate ^Veda of charms and incantations^, 
but rather ‘Veda of the brahma’ (holy word, or religion); the name was arrived 
at in a round-about fashion 4 . Other descriptive names, such as hhesajani^ ydiic^ 
etc., are only partial descriptions, and, though familiar enough, were never used 
extensively. Instead, the association of this Veda is with mythic fire-priests of 
prehistoric antiquity, Atharvan and Angifas (later also Bhrgu), resulting in the 
names Atharvaiigirasah, Bhrgvahgirasah and finally AtharvavedaS. It has been 
assumed that this association is entirely secondary, due to the natural desire 
to adorn these otherwise almost nameless compositions with an antiquity and 
dignity which do not belong to theni^. But the names atharvan dxAangiras 
are well ingrained in the poems themselves, in a sense very much the same 
as that of the oldest title of the AV. (atharvdf)girasaJi)T . Hence it may be 
well to remember that the Atharvanic rites as well as the Hindu ceremonies 
connected with home-life (grhya) centre about the fire, in distinction from 
the greater Vedic ceremonies (srauta) which are in the main concerned with 
oblations of soma. It is therefore possible to believe that the Vedic Hindus, 
when they said of these charms that they were atharvdnak and angirasak^ 
meant ‘fire-charms’, i. e., charms pronounced when some oblation, not somaj 
was poured or thrown into the fire^. 

Indo-Aryan Research, 11, In. 


1 



2 


IL Literature and History, i r. Athauva-Veda and Gop\tha-Lrahmana, 


§ 2. Relative chronology of the popular and hieratic litera- 
tures. — Anyhow this difference of nomenclature between the three Vedas on 
the one side and the Atharvan on the other is an important and profound 
one in the history of Vedic literature. Leaving aside the beginnings of specu- 
lative theosopliic literature which are represented freely in both types (RV. 
and AV.), we are lead to two main divisions of Vedic literature, the three 
Vedas with their soma-sacrifices, and the AV. with the house-ceremonies 
(gr/ija), I e., respectively, the hieratic and the popular religion. The statement 
put in this form is of importance for the relative chronology of the Atharvan 
writings; it becomes evident ;at once, and from the ethnological point of view 
a fortion\ that there can have been no period of Vedic history in which 
house-customs and mantras of essentially Atharvanic character \vere wanting, 
while at the same time the more elaborate hieratic mantras and soma-sacri- 
fices were present. In fact, in some form or other both are prehistoric. The 
hieratic feligion joins the Avestan //^<w/^z-worship ; the Atharvanic charms and 
practices are very likely rooted in an even earlier, perhaps Indo-European, 
antiquity'’. At least, he who does not regard the analoga between xAtharvanic 
charms and practices and those of the Teutonic and other L K. peoples as 
entirely accidental (anthropological) must hesitate to ascribe all the mantras 
of the AV. and (Irhyasutras to a late Vedic period’'^’. In the case of some, 
e, g. the wedding-charms and the funeral hymns, this is manifestly impo.ssible; 
it is not less so in the case of at least some hymns embodied in the AV. 
Sainliitas alone, as, e. g. 4. 12, This point of view gains much firmness 
from a complete survey of the vast armory of charms, blessings, and curses 
contained in the AW, such as may be gained by reading over the analysis 
of the vulgate as given in this book (Part III). What is the nature of the 
impulse which created ex nthilo^ at a late period so strong and popular a 
need, and with it such elaborate means of satisfaction; what were the conditions 
which exempted the earlier and therefore more primitive Vedic time from 
these needs and their gratification? It has been assumed that the more 
intimate blending of the Vedic people with the barbarous aborigines T India 
may have contributed much to the vulgarization of the beliefs and literature 
of the Vedic Hindus. This is certainly true to some extent, but it does not 
account for a literature of such extent and character as the Atharvan. This 
is, after all, only to a limited extent suggestive of aboriginal barbarism: 
demonolatry with all other things that are hideous and uncanny make up only a 
part of fhe AV. and the related Grhya-literature; nor is it possible to demon- 
strate that even all that is borrowed from outside sources. Contrariwise, Athar- 
vanic charms are often pervaded by a more genuine ‘Aryan’ ..pirit than the 
more artistic prayers to the gods of the Rigvedic pantheon (e.g. 3. 12; 3,30; 
4.8; 7. 36 and 37). That the differences in language, style, and metre 
between AV. and RV. are by no means always to be interpreted as chrono- 
logical but rather as dialectic; and that the songs of the lower grades of the 
people were sure to be composed in a language slightly different from that 
of the higher priestly families will be shown below (% 38 and 42). 

S 3. Chronology of the Atharvan redaction. — Yet there can be 
no doubt that the existing collections of the Atharvan are the final product 
of a redactioral activity much later than that of the RV., and that many 
hymns and prose pieces in the AV. date from a very late period of Vedic 
productivity. The Atharvan hymns as well as the Grhya-rites present them^ 
selves in a form thoroughly Rishified and Brahmanized; even the mantras 
and rites of the most primitive ethnological flavor have been caught in the 
drag-net of the priestly class and made part of the universal Vedic religion. 



I The Atharva-Veda in General. — A. Character and Chronology. 3 


Thus the AV. with its popular beliefs poses outwardly in the same attitude 
of dignity as the RV. with the soma-rites, i. e. Brahmanical priests handle 
charm and hocus-pocus as religion, not as superstition. As a natural con- 
sequence theVedic pantheon is brought down and made to participate in the 
common people’s customs and superstitions. But one feels the difference; 
they are employed mechanically, they have become sterile, and only rarely 
develop their character beyond the point at which the RV, leaves them. 
Agni, Indra, the Maruts, Brhaspati, etc., are mentioned most always in series 
which show that the Vedic gods have become indifferently of equal value. 
Being of old slayers of demons, they are needed, of course, against the darkling 
brood of demons, goblins, wizards, and witches which rise above the horizon 
from the lowest depths of the folks consciousness: demon-slayers they are in 
the AV., and little else. Even ethical Varmia with his spies, by virtue of 
his unrivaled facilities for ferreting out hostile, i. e., eo ipso sinful, schemes of 
enemies and sorcerers, figures familiarly. Such criticisms as are called out 
by this inherently difficult and paradoxical condition 0/ things in the midst 
of a people capable of higher thought, belong to a rather late time. While 
all this has been going on speculative theosophic thought which seems never 
to have been wanting in India, has also moved from such beginnings as are 
found in the RV, to a greater degree of subtlety and mysticism: the subli- 
mated pantheism of the Upanisads has been reached nearly, if not quite. 
Everything is grist to the mill of the Atharvan: not only are entire theosophic 
hymns fitted out as weapons against the hated enemy and wizard, but 
individual speculative formulas and theosophic entities have joined the clap- 
trap that is supposed to be effective against ^him that hates us and whom we 
hate’. This explains the extraordinary fact that a hymn like 8. 6, resting 
upon the lowest bathos of folk-lore, can e.xist peaceably by the side of such 
fine-spun theosophic lucubrations as the two hymns to Skambha ‘Support’ 
(to. 7 and 8) which present the knowledge of brahma and atman as the 
liighest goal; or that asat ‘non-being’, the perplexing cosmogonic conception, 
may be turned against performers of spells (4. 19. 6)*^ From such pheno- 
mena as these, rather than the word-fomis, or demonological contents of the 
liyinns, the evidence of a later time must be extracted: the concurrent use 
of popular, hieratic, and philosophical themes for practical purposes, often 
manifestly secondary, betokens a highly reflective, manipulating period of 
Brahmanical activity. 

S 4. Relation of the AV. to the Brahmanas, and the Dharma- 
texts. — Indeed the word Brahmanical which has just now been used is to 
be taken, it seems, in its narrower sense, namely, the period of the compo- 
sition of the Brahmaijia-texts. The observant reader of a commentary on the 
AV., such as has been published by the author in SBE., voL XLII, will find 
abundant evidence that the spirit of the Brahmaija-texts — I refrain from 
saying Brahmania period because there never was a period devoted exclusively 
to the composition of Brahmarias — asserts itself mightily in the collection of 
the AV. as a whole. Above all, these hymns run the whole gamut of the 
pretensions and demands of the Brahraaija priesthood in the style of the 
Brahnciaha-texts themselves. The Brahmans in the AV., as in the Brahmana- 
iexts, call themselves det^a^ ‘gods”^^; their claims reach the highest pitch. 
A comparison of Weber’s ‘Collectanea on the Castes’ *3 with the chapter in 
this book on the ‘Prayers and imprecations dn the interest of Brahmans’ 
(S 56) fixes pretty definitely the lower limit in the relative chronology of the 
Atharvan diaskeuasis: it belongs to an advanced period of Brahmanical literary 
activity; there is nothing in the way of assuming that the composition 

1 * 




4 


11. Literature and History, ib. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


of such texts as AB. and SB. preceded the redactions of the Atharvan Sain- 
hitas. The sparse geographical data of the AV., especially the mention of the 
rivers Yamuna and Varanavati and the regions of the Ahgas and Magadhas'^, 
point to an acquaintance with India far enough to the east and south-east 
to accommodate the scene of action of the Brahmana- texts. Among zoographic 
facts pointing in the same direction the most conspicuous is the Atharvan’s 
familiarity with the tiger, the inhabitant of the swampy forests of Bengal, 
perhaps more narrowly the region about Benares^^^ The inevitable and 
doubtless prehistoric (Indo-Iranian) distinction, on the one hand, between priests, 
chieftains, and free commoners, all three drja, and the aboriginal servitor- 
class (dasyUi sudrd) has advanced in the AV., so that the line is drawn sharply 
not only between the two {drya and sudrd) but also between the first three, 
brdlmana^ ksatriya and vaisya^^. The knowledge of anatomy, human and 
animal, has advanced nearly if not quite so far as in the Brahmanical accounts 
of the asvamedha tmd. pirusamedha^’^. The hymn ii. 7 which deifies the 
leavings of the porridge {ucchistd) is not only full of hair-splitting scholastic 
theosophy, but also contains a long catalogue of the /n??//«-sacrifices and 
the technical formr, of recitation of hymns and liturgic chant The combination 
of the two godsTvastar and Savitar and their assimilation to Prajapati reflects 
the spirit of the Brahmaijas (see 2. 26. i ; 3. 8. 2 ; 7. 17. 4). In another direction 
the AV. reaches an advanced period of literary activity, namely in the marked 
development of expiatory hymns {frdyasciitd)\ the entire tract of hymns, 
AV. 6. no — 121, deals with sin {papa, enas, kilMsa, etc.) very much in the 
same spirit as the Vidnana-texts and the Dharma-texts. Thus the chapter of 
this book on ‘Expiation of sin and defilemenf (§ 58) touches at many points 
the paragraph entitled ‘Religious delinquencies* in Jolly’s ‘Recht und Sitte^ 
p. 11511.; as also the /w^^/aV/^z-clmpters, Svidh. i. 5fr. Especially noteworthy 
are 6. 117 — 119 which apparently aim to salve the conscience for unpaid 
debts {rna)^ in part gambling-debts; and 6 . 112 and T13 which deal with 
the class of sins Sviped off’ by the gods from themselves u|>on the ‘scape- 
god’ Trita, sins like the marriage of a younger brother before the older, 
abortion, and murder of Brahmans This class of hymns together with the 
closely related so-called kumand^'^^s TA. 2 . 3 — 6 , mark, as has hardly been 
noticed, the longest line of contact between mantra and dharma, and the 
matter is of some importance in determining the relative chronology of the 
Atharvan redaction as very late. Of course dates, real dates, in Vedic literature 
prior to Buddha and the Epic are still ‘pins set up, only to be bowled down 
again’. So true is this that fortunately no knowing attempts have been made 
as yet to fix either the date of the composition of the individual hymns or 
the redaction. This much is clear that the chronology of each hymn, and 
each antiquarian and institutional theme, must be viewed from an ever 
changing critical position, and with a particularly constant regm*d of the 
related facts of the whole Vedic tradition: to mass the testimony of the AV. 
at any one point, to speak, except for occasional convenience, of tlie period 
of the AV., seems an even more pernicious error than the bundling together 
of the facts of the so-called ‘Rigvedic’ period into one package, separate 
from all the rest of the early ];lrahmanic antiquity. 

I^lADiirsCTDANASARASVATi, Prusthaiiabhcda, IS. I, i6 (Dkussen, AHgenieine Ge- 
schichte der Pliilosophie, vol. I, part i, p. 50); Sayana, Introduction to liis com- 
mentary ontlicAV.; Air.ERUNi, India (Sachau’s translation), p. laofT.; Colebrookk, 
Essays 2, vol, I, p, 13, 80 ff.; BoHLEN, Das altc Indien, vol. I, p. 12S; Lasskn, 
Jndische Altertluimskumle, vol. I, p. 523; Roth, Ziir Litteratur und Geschiclite des 
Weda, p. 5, 13, 37 ff.; Abhandlung iiber den Atharva-Veda (Tiibingen 1856); Der 
Atharva-Veda in Kasclimir (Tubingen 1875); Max Muller, UASL. p. 446 0 .; Chips 



I. The Atharva-Veda in General. — B. Historical Character. 5 


from a German Workshop, vol. I, p. 9ff.; Weber, IS. I, 289, 294 ff.; XIII, 33 iff.; 
Indische Literatnrgeschichte 2, p. 11, Whitney, JAOS. IV, 254; OLS. I, 

p. 18 ff.; Sanskrit Grammar, p. xvi; Ludwig, Der Rig-Veda, vol. Ill, p. 28, 34 iff-; 
L. V. SciiROEDER, Indien’s Literatur und Cultiir, p. lyoff. ; Kaegi, The Rig-Veda 
(Arrowsmith’s translation), p. 4, 97; R. T. II. Griffith, Hymns of the Atharva- 
veda (translation), in the preface; Hardy, Die Vedisch-brahmanische Periode, 
p. 190 ff.; Oldenberg, Die Religion des Veda, p. 17 ff.; Hopkins, Religions of 
India, p. 151 ff. ; Bloomfield, Hymns of the Atharvaveda, SBE. XLII, Introduction; 
AnonymuS, The Atharva- Veda described, London and Madras 1897 (missionary tract). 

I Book 16 contains, however, some passages which are written in cadenced 
i>rose from which it is possible to extract at least single metrical padas. This is 
true of much other prose material in the AV. (as also in the YV.), so that it is 
not unfreqiiently difficult to decide -whether a given hymn or stanza is prose or 
poetry: prose and loose verse are mixed - up in the AV. to an extent not quith 
reached in any other class of Vedic writings. Cp. Whitney, Index Verborum, 
p. 5. — 2 See ])elow, S 3 ^* — 3 Below, S I 9 * — Below, § 9 and 33, and more 
fully, SBE. XLII, p. LViu, and lxv ff. — 5 Sec g S and 9. — Weber, IS. I, 295; 
Omina und Portenta, p. 347; WJ..2, p. 164; Whitney, OLS. I, 18. — 7 SBE. XLII, 
p. XXI and XXXI ff. — ^ The connection of atharvan with fire is Tndo-Iranian 
aihravai^\ cp. Spiegel, Eranische Alterthumskiinde, III, p. 559; ‘Die arisclie 
Periode, p. 232; Haug, Essays on the Parsis, p. 2S0, 294; Geiger, Civilization of 
the Eastern Iranians, vol, TI, ]•>. 4Sff. ; and many other writers. Haug’s attempt to 
show that the Avesta is acquainted with some Atharvan collection tinder the name 
ap^ivi amsth\\vcs> only historical interest: see, Brahma nnd die Brahmanen, p. 43 ff. ; 
lissays, p. 182. — 9 Cp. Knauf.r, Ecstgrnss an Roth, j). 64ff.; Winternitz, 
The Mantrapatha of the Apastambins, p. xi.iv. — Adalbert Kuhn, KZ XIII, 
p. 49~74; 113 — 157; SBE. XLII, p. 313, 386, 454. Cp. Sten'ZLER, Uber die Btle, 
Appendix to his translation of AG.; JBllkhrandt, Ritiial-Littcratur, 2. — See 

^ 59. — 12 See 5. 1 1. 1 1; 6. 13. i; 114* l; u. i- 23; 12.3.38; 4*23; 19.62. i. 

Cp. Zimmer, p. 205 ff.; .SUE. XLII, Inde.x, under, ‘Brahman-priests’. — H IS. X, 

1 — 160. — *4 Zimmer, 5, 20, 31; the interpretation of varanlvati however, 
quite doubtful: SliE. XLII, p. 376. — 15 Zimmer, p. 79. — See, 5. 17. 9; 

6. 13. i; 7. 103. 1; 12. 5. 46; 15. 8. I ff. ; 19. 32. 8; 62. I. — ^7 See, 9. 6 7 ; 

10. 2, etc. — See Bloomfield, < ontrilnitions. Seventh Series. AJl’h. XVII, 
430 ff.; Jolly, p. 116. — 19 See g 58, note 3. 


B. HISTORICAL CHARACTER OF TliE ATHARVAN, AND ITS 
RELATION TO THE HOUSE-BOOKS. 

S 5. The mutual relations of the AV. and the Grhya-sutras, and 
their historical value. — Ancient India, as is well known, has no history in 
the ordinary sense, no secular history. In lieu thereof the history of its religion 
and the history of its institutions are unrivaled among the peoples of olden times 
in their continuity and completeness. Ibspecially the obscurer and more sluggish 
currents of ordinary daily life, a knowledge of which is so important for the 
true estimate of a people, are laid bare to the eye of the historian by an 

altogether unusual kind of tradition. We are not left to reconstruct a picture 

of the private life of the Vedic Hindu from scattered, incidental statements 
of their ancient literature alone. Valuable as such statements are, more trustworthy 
perhaps, as far as they go, than intentional descriptions, they are yet certain 
to be fragmentary, and to yield but a hazy outline of the subject. In addition 
to such incidental statements Vedic literature has preserved native systematic 
treatises on home-life which have searched out and stated systematically a 

well-defined body of facts connected with the every-day existence of the 

individual and the. family. These are the Grhya-sutras, or house-books, composed 
as formal treatises at a comparatively late Vedic period^, but reporting 
practices and prayers of great antiquity^. This class of texts owe their 
existence to the religious view which the Hindus were led to take of the 
entire course of their lives. In its even daily course, as well as in its cnicial 
moments, the life of the Hindu is surrounded by a plethora of religious forms; 



6 n. Literatuke and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


it is, as it were, sacramental throughout. The beliefs of the folk did not 
forever flow in a separate undercurrent beneath the open-air religion, scorned 
by the latter as superstition, but they were at an early time imbedded within 
the religion. The Grhya-sutras, as in a measure also the Srauta-sutras 
resulted from a codification of popular beliefs undertaken by the Brahmans 
at a time when these beliefs had been completely harmonized with the 
Brahmanical order of things, as well as with the divine law and the personal 
needs and demands of the gods. 

It is not to be doubted that the simple practices which are at the bottom 
of the systematic house-books were at all times accompanied by prayers to 
such gods, genii, and demons as peopled the fancy of the simple folk"^. To 
be sure the Grhya-sutras in their finished form are later redactorial products 
of schools of Vedic learning, and a-s such participate to a large extent in the 
entire stock of hymns, stanzas, and iiturgic prayers of their particular school 
without careful regard to the original purpose for which these hymns, stanzas, 
etc., were composed In other words, as the practice of home-rites passed 
more and more into the hands of the Brahmans, the latter did not stint them 
their spiritual learning; they decked out the practices with mantras often 
ludicrously misapplied to the situation. We may also suppose that many 
ancient prayers were remodelled by the Brahmans to accord better with their 
own religious ideas and literary habits. Yet it is impossible to believe that 
marriage-ceremony, burial-rite, medical xhann, exorcism and the like can ever 
have been carried on without prayer, and it will be ultimately a distinct task 
of Vedic study to find out what are the original grhya-mantras and grhya- 
fonnulas in distinction from the later importations. Such a body of prayers 
would be 'even more fit to be trusted as a report of early customs than the 
Sutras themselves, they would cancel for themselves all suspicion that we are 
dealing with individual trumped up fancies. The -prayers of the Grhya-sutras 
are either woven into the account of the practices themselves, or they are 
preserved as separate collections {inantm-brdhmana^ mafitra-pathd ) : the Sarp- 
hitas of the AV. are, as it were, Mantra-pa{has on a large scale, broader in 
scope and freer from school-influence than those of the house-books proper. 
We may expect to find in their hymns a picture of the private antiquities of 
ancient India, painted on a large canvass with no particular choice of* favored 
subjects placed in the fore-ground; a picture such as cannot be furnished by 
the Gyhya-sutras, because they limit themselves eclectically to good or pious 
subjects in the main. The light and the shadows, the good and the evil in 
the life of this ancient people must appear in due proportion. 

$ 6. Scope of the AV. as a record of ancient life. — This’ expectation 
the hymns of the AY. fulfil quite amply. Supported by its own ritual book, 
the Sutra of Kausika, which reports the practices connected with these hymns 
in a way that is on the whole trustworthy, the AV. furnishes an almost com- 
plete picture of the ordinary life of the Vedic Hindu* The AV. deals with 
the themes of the house-books proper and is, of course, supplemented by 
these interesting and important treatises. The life of the average Ary a from 
the cradle to the funeral-pyre is depicted by the AV, with greater freedom 
and completeness than in the house-books; the difference, as I have said 
before, is that the AV. is not at all squeamish in -the choice of its themes, 
and exhibits the ordinary Hindu not only in his aspect of devout and virtuous 
adherent of the Brahmanic gods, and performer of pious practices, but also 
as the natural semi-civilized man: rapacious, demon and fear-ridden, hateful, 
Imtful, addicted to sorcery. The variety of practices and beliefs connected 
with house and home, field and cattle, love and marriage, trade and village- 



L The Atharva-Veda m General. — C. The Names of the Atharva-Veda. 


7 


politics, is also far greater in the AV. than in the house-books. But it con- 
tains in addition much that is wanting or barely touched upon in the Grhya- 
sutras. The analysis of the AV. which forms the third part of this work ex- 
hibits this difference even in the headings of its separate }jaragraphs. Thus 
the medical charms ($ 50) present a complete picture of primitive Hindu 
medicine, a theme that is hardly indicated in any other department ofVedic 
literature. The house-books have nothing that corresponds to the theme, 
‘Prayers and imprecations in the interest of Brahmans’ (§56); very little that 
corresponds to the ^ Royal rites’ (855): these two chapters hold the earliest 
fairly systematic account of the two superior castes, the Brahmans and the 
K^atriyas. The ‘Women’s rites’ (8 53), the ‘Charms to secure harmony, .in- 
fluence in the village-assembly’ (8 54)? and many other less prominent themes,' 
though not entirely absent in the house-books, are also characteristically 
Atharvan. It may be said fairly that the house-books are excerpts from the 
broad sphere of life with all its realities, excerpts which were begun in a 
certain mood that governed the choice of subjects, and that this choice 
became traditional in all non-Atharvanic Vedic schools. Thus all Grhya-sutras 
present in the main the same selections, their many differences notwith- 
standing^: the circle or endless chain of human existence: birth, confirmation, 
Brahman disciplehood, arrival at man’s estate, marriage, householdership and 
again birth, etc, with many intermediate rites. Other matters are treated only 
incidentally and in a subsidiary way. Not only are the Grhya-sutras restricted to 
the more pious and orderly aspects of daily life, but they deal also in the main 
with those practices which are of a regular, permanent, or periodic character 
— nityakarmdni as the theologians call them — whereas the AV. is engaged 
largely with occasional and optional practices {naimittika^ kdmyd). To this 
the AV. owes its flavor of romance and unexpectedness. As the reader 
works his way hymn by hymn through the Atharvan collectipns, arranged 
with a degree of gaucherie hardly to be excelled V he is surprised and 
bewildered by the number and variety of subjects, by the insistent way in 
which the obscurer relations and emotions of human life are brought to the 
surface and exploited. And there is left finally the definite impression that 
the precious literary diligence of the Hindus has in this instance preserved 
a document of priceless value for the institutional history of early India as 

well as the ethnological history of the human race, that in this respect the 

AV. is a document as precious as is the RV. on the side of mythology and 
formal priestly religion, 

I See Oldenberg, SBE. XXX, p. xvnfL — 2 Note in this connection, e. g., 

the way in which the proper noun aiiihigva, ‘presenting a cow to guests’, in the 

RV*, has embalmed an essential feature of the a^ghya, the rites at the reception of 
an honored guest; see Contributions. Seventh Series. AJPh. XVII, 424. — 3 Hille- 
BRANDT, Ritual-Litteratur, p. i ff. — 4 Quite the opposite view is advocated by 
Oldenberg, 1 . c., p. X; it has been criticized by WiNTERNiTZ, The Mantrapatha of 
the Apastambins, p. XLiv. — 5 Cp. E. W. Fav, Johns Hopkins UniversUy Circulars, 
May, 1890, vol. IX, nr. 81, p. 74; SBE, XLII, p. xuiiff. — ^ For a comprehensive 
view of the themes of the Grhya-sutras see Oldenberg’s synopsis, SBE. XXX, 
p. 300— 307; for a description in detail, HnxEBRANDT, 1 . c,, p. 4iff. — 7 See $ 36 ff, 

C. THE NAMES OF THE ATHARVA-VEDA AND THEIR MEANINGS h 

8 7. The compound Atharvangirasah and the meaning of its 
two members, Atharvan and Angiras. — The oldest name of the fourth 
Veda is the dvandva-plural athart)dngira$ah^{KS. 10. 7. 20), the name found 
at the head of the manuscripts of the Saunaklya-Samhita. More or less 
secondary and irregular forms and derivatives, such as occur in the expressions 



S n. Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


atharvmgirasi sruta?n^ Mahabh. 3. 305. 20 = 17066 kusaiam atkarumjgirase^ 
Yajn. I. 312; krtydm atharvmgirasbn^ Mahabh. 8. 40. 33 — 184S; atharvd- 
ngirast^. srutih^ Manu 11.33; atharvdngirasam tarpaydmi, Baudh. Dh. 2. 5. 9. 14, 
are of later growth. The name atkarvan and its derivatives are employed 
growingly throughout the literature, whereas the name angiras by itself occurs 
but in a single Vedic passage, TS. 7. 5. ii. 2 = Kathaka Asvamedhagrantha 
{angirobhyafi svdkd), as the designation of the fourth Veda Quite frequently, 
however, the members of the compound atharifdngirasali are separated so 
tliat each is mentioned by itself, but always in more or less close vicinity to 
one another, showing that the Atharvans and Ahgirases had a separate, existence, 
and that the AV. consists of these two component parts. In fact, in a con- 
siderable range of the lite];ature especially of older times the term atkarvan 
refers to the auspicious practices of the Veda, the blmajani (AV. ii. 6. 14), 
those parts of the Veda which are recognized by the Atharvan ritual and the 
orthodox Brahmanical writings as sd 7 iia^ ^holy\ and paiqtika, ^auspicious^; the 
term a^lgiras refers to the hostile sorcery practices of the Veda, the ydtu (SB. 
10* 5. 2. 20), or abhicdra^ which is terrible {ghord). 

This view of the double character of the AV. is expressed most plainly 
and familiarly in the Gopathabrahmana. Thus i. 2. 21 and i. 5. 10, rci 
yajusi sdmni sdfite 'tha ghore] in the last-named case GB. substitutes these 
five Vedas for the irayl in the corresponding passage, SB. 12. 3. 3. 2, upon 
which GB. is based. These two Atharvanic Vedas assunie such reality in the 
mind of the author of GB. as to be furnished each with an independent 
vydhrti^ to match bkftr^ bkuvaJi, svaJj of the trayl, namely, om for the Atharvan 
«= ^anfa] janat for the Angiras «= gkora: GB. i. 2. 24 and i. 3. 3. In i. 3. 3 
the vydhrtis of the trayt are sandwiched in between cm and janat for protection 
{gup: see GB. 1. 1. 13). Cp, also 1. 1. 5, 8 and i. 3. 4. In the ritual practices, 
Vait. 5. 10; GB. I, 2. 18 the same distinction is maintained in behalf of two 
classes of plants, one of which is described as sdnta^ or atharvan a] the other, 
used in hostile sorcery, as dngirasa. The latter word has assumed in the 
Kausika the meaning of dhhicdrika or ghora, and the fifth Kalpa of the AV, 
goes by the names Angirasa-kalpa, Abhicara-kalpa, and Vidhana-kalpa. The 
words dngirasa == dbhicdrika^ and pratydngirasa as referring to ‘counter- 
witchcraft’ {pratyabhkarand) are also used in Vidhana- texts outside of the AV., 
in fact as designations of such texts, e. g. Rig-vidhana 4. 6, 4^; with this 
pejorative use of the word we may perhaps also connect the fact that the 
Puranas count the Angirasa-Veda as one of the four Vedas of the Parsis 
(Maga), the other three, Vada, Visvavada, and Vidut, also conveying thinly 
veiled contempt for the religious books of a foreign religion^l What is even 
more significant, the distinction between Atharvana-Veda and Angirasa-Veda 
is also recognized by the non-Atharvanic Brahmai)as and Sutras, and also 
associated by them in explicit^ terms respectively with idnta and gkora. At 
SB. 13.4.3.3^; AS. 10,7. iff.; SS. 16.2.911, on the occasion oiikt pariplava^ 
at the horse-sacrifice, sections from these two Vedas are recited: AS. andSS. 
specify that a bkesajam {s'dntam) be recited from the Atharvaoa-Veda, zgkoram 
(abkicdrikam) from the Angirasa-Veda. Cp. also PB. 12.9. 10; 16. xo. 10, and 
the names of apocryphal sages and^ divinities like Bhisaj Atharvana, in con- 
trast with Ghora Afigirasa, as also Saipyu Atharvaria and Santi, the wife of 
Atharvan^ Possibly the assumed inferiority of the Angiras in the Brahmaaa- 
legends of the contests between the Adityas and Angiras also points to the 
uncanny, devilish character of the latter, and may be derived froni the 
same sphere of conceptions: the Angiras regularly appear as vanquished 
victims, similar to the Asuras in their struggles with the Devas^. 



L The Atharva-Veda in General. — C The Names of the Atharva-Veda. 9 


The AV- Samhita marks the same distinction very clearly. At 11.6.14 
four Vedic mantra-categories are indicated by the expressions 7 xah, sd?naniy 
hhesajd^ and yajumsi ; here the choice of the word hhesajd is eclectic and 
one-sided. Its precise complement is SB. 10. 5, 2. 20, where ydtu and the 
yatuvidah are placed by the side of the three Vedas and their representative 
priests. That bhesaja and ydtu are complements of one another appears 
from AV. 6. 13.3, iiamas te (sc. mrtyofi) ydtudhdficbhyo^ nainas te bhesajebhyaL 
The hhesajd of AV.ii.6.*i,4 and the ydtu of the SB. passage make up together 
what is embraced in the name atharv dngir as ah {hS 0,^,2 6 ). The Samhita 
also associates markedly the term dhgirasa with aggressive sorcery and the 
practice of spells {kriyd). Thus krtyd d?igirasih; prat iclna dhgi- 

7 'asali ... p 7 'afldh krtyd dkrtyd ^mun krtydkrto jahi] cp. also 12. 5. 52, and 
6. 45. 3 — IIV. I o. 1 64. 4. And the distinction between Atharvanic and Afigirasic 
plants appears also in ii. 4. 16 (cp. 8. 7. 17), probably in the same sense as 
in the Atharvan ritual, i. e. in the sense, respectively, of ‘ holy’ and Vitchcraft’ 
plants. Finally the late Parisista hymns, AV. 19. 22 and 23, repeated in the 
IJttamapatala, Ath. Paris. 46. 9 and 10, deal with and state subdivisions of 
dhgu'asa and dtharvana texts, each separately; cp. GB. i. i. 5, 8, and i. 3. 4. 

S 8. Cause of the distinction between Atharvan and Ahgiras, — 
As regards the chronology and cause of this differentiation of atharvan and 
ahgiras the texts offer but scant information. The association of both names 
(and later of the name bhrgic also) with the texts and practices of the fourth 
V eda may be sought in their character of mythic fire-priests, or fire-churners : 
the homely practices of the AV. may have been in charge of human fire- 
priests in distinction from so-ma-priests^. As regards the terrible aspect of the 
Angiras as compared with the Atharvans, we may point to RV. 10. 108. 10, 
where Saramd threatens the Panis with the afigirasah . . . ghordh. iVlore im- 
portant is the Angirasic character ofBrhaspati, the divine Purohita: in Raui 
135* 9 Brhaspati xVhgirasa appears as the representative, or the divinity of 
sorcery; in the Mahabh. he is frequently called ahgiras dm sredhaJu In his 
function of body-priest of the gods he exercises against hostile powers those 
fierce qualities which are later regarded as Angirasic in the broader sense, cp, 
RV. 10. 164.4 = AV.6.45.3, where Brhaspati figures as PratTcIna (‘Back-hurler’) 
Angirasa. Still less obvious are the reasons wliy the word atharvan should be 
particularly associated with sdnta and bhesaja\ perhaps this was accomplished 
by simply contrasting it with ahgiras, after the latter had assumed its sinister 
sensed. In any case at an early time the terms atharvdnaJi in the sense of 
‘holy charms’, and ahgirasah in the sense of ‘witchcraft charms’, joined the 
more distinctively hieratic terms realty yajuihd, and sdmdni, as characteristic 
types of Brahmanical literary performances. But this distinction was at a later 
period again abandoned; in the end the name atharva?i and its derivatives 
{atharvdnah, atharvan dni, dtharvandli, dtharva 7 iika, atharvana, atharzmja, and, 
finally, atharva-veda) prevail as designations of the charms and practices of 
the fourth Veda, without reference to their strongly diversified character. 

S 9. The terms Bhrgvafigirasah, Brahmaveda, and the designa- 
tions of Atharvan priests. — Two other designations of the AV. differ from 
the preceding in that they are the product of a later Atharvanic literary age; 
neither of tlieni are found in the Samhita, both are almost wholly restricted 
to the ritual texts of the xVtharvan itself. They are the names bhrgvahgirasah 
and brahma-veda^ The term bhrgvafigirasaJi, as far as is known, occurs only 
in Atharvan texts. Though hhrgu in this compound takes the place of athafvan, 
the terms bhrgavah or bhrgirucda do not occur, except that the Culika-Up. 1 1 
designates the Atharvan collection of mantras as bhrguvistara (schoL, bhdrgava- 



I o II. Literature and History, i b. Atharva~Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


granthd^. The temi hhrgvangiras^ almost always in the compound hhrgzh 
angihvid, is the favorite' designation of the AV. in the Atharvan ritual texts ; 
it makes a show^ in fact, of crowding out designations based upon the stem 
atharvan^'^. And there is an indefinable tendency to magnify the importance 
of the term bhrgu at the expense of the others, as when the cosmogony GB. 
I. I. 3 creates Bhrgu before Atharvan; or when GB. i. 2. 22 says that the 
Atharvans and Ahgiras are the eyes of Bhrgu; or when the Culika-Up. 10 
says that the Bhrgus are foremost among the Atharvans {atharvano bhrgutia- 
maJ^)\ if this is taken seriously at all it reflects rather the result than the 
cause of the substitution of the name bhrgu for atharvan. There is indeed 
no valid reason why the term bhrgu has succeeded in encroaching so far upon 
the term atharvan. The following may, however, be remarked. The three 
words atharvan.^ ahgiras^ and bhrgu are in general equivalent, or closely 
related mythic names, concerned with the production, or the service of the 
fire. Occasionally in the mantras (RV. 10. 14.6) they are found all together, 
or bhrgu is found in company with atharvan (RV. 10.92. 10), or with 
(RV. 8. 43. 13). This inter-relation continues in the Yajus and Brahmana- 
texts*® in such a way that the juxtaposition of bhrgu and ahgiras becomes 
exceedingly frequent, broaching on the complete synonymy reached in SB. 
4. I. 5. I, where the sage Cyavana is designated either as a Bhargava, or as 
an Angirasa. Perhaps the frequency of this collocation suggested to the 
Atharvavedins a mode of freshening up the ‘more trite compound aiharvd- 
hgirasak] of any more conscious reason for the preference of the word bhjgu 
the texts show no trace. 

The term brahma-veda origin is discussed below (§ 33) likewise 

belongs to the sphere of the Atharvan ritual. Outside of the Atharvan there 
is but a single unquestionable occurrence, SG. 1.16.3. Even in the Atharvan 
Upani§ads the term is wanting, curiously enough The earliest occurrences, 
aside from SG., are Vait. 1. 1; GB. i. i. 22; 2. 16, 19; 5. 15, ,19; 2. 2. 6. The 
word is common in the Paim?tas^4. The supposition that SB. 14.8.14.1 — 4 
— Brh. Up. 5. 13. I — 4 with its series, uktham'{^- ri), yajuh^ sdma^ ksatram, 
alludes to the Atharvan as the Veda of the Ksatriyas is at present no more 
likely than when it was advanced by the author, SEE. XLII, p. xxvff. Cp. 
also Weber, Verz. II, p. 1203. The RV. Pratisakhya 16. 54 (55) mentions 
a Vedic book or collection by the name of subhesa/a^ ‘collection of remedial 
charms’, probably only another way of saying bhesajdni, i. e. the auspicious 
Atharvan charms; cp. the expression saubhesajam chanda/i, GB. i. 5. 23 (p. 85, 
bottom). Curious is Alberuni’s .statement (India, Sachau's translation, vol I, 
p. 129) that the AV. does not consist of the same compositions as the Rik 
and Yajus, but of a third kind called bhara ‘song of praise’ (RV.). 

Designations of priests devoted to the AV. are wanting in the Samhitas, 
unless the terms and angirasa, AV. 5. 19. i, 2 are intended as such. 

The Atharvan ritual texts use brahman and bhrgvahgirovii, in addition to 
derivatives from the stem atharvan. Very late is the use of the bahiivrihis 
paticakaipa and pancakalpin, ‘one who practices with the five Kalpas of the 
AV.’: Mahabh. 12. 342. 99 = 13258; 13. 14. 309 901; Mahabha§ya (IS. 

XIII. 455); and as titles of scribes of Atharvan ritual texts Whether the word 
mdtrkalpika in the Mahabha?ya bears any relation to the AV. is still an un- 
settled point: see Kaui IntroL p. lviii. 

^ The present chapter is an abstract of the essay on this subject, SBE. XLII, 
p. XVII— •xxviii, with certain not unimportant corroborative additional details that 
have come to hand since the date of that publication. Cp. Hillebrandt, Ritual- 
Litteratur, p. 169. — 2 Bombay ed., aiharvdhgirasi irutam\ Calcutta, however, 



L The Atharva-Veda in General. — D. The Schools of the A.-Y. i i 


atharvaUrad Iruiam, — 3 Later this designation crops out in grammatical writings, 
in the superscription of Ath. Pratis., and in the Mahabhasya to Panini 5. 2.37 (cp. 
IS. Xni.433> — 4 Bloomfield, JAOS. XL 387 ff.; SBE. XLII, p.xvmff. — s Cp. 
Wilson in Reinaud’s Memoire sur ITnde, p. 394; Weber, LS. 1, 292, note; WL.^ 
164, note. — 6 SBE. XLII, p. xxi. — 7 Gp. Weber, IS. L 291 ff.; and below, 
§ 52, note 3. — ^ Cp. Knauer, Festgruss an Roth, p. 6411. — 9 A dash of 
popular etymology may have helped the process: a-iharvan c^. fMirtJ 

in the sense of ‘injure’, Dhatupatha 15. 62, and perhaps MS. 2. 10. I; also the 
roots iurv and dhUrv \vi,th similar meanings. — SBE. XLII, p. xxv. — See 
Kaus. 63. 3; 94. 3, 4 (cp. 137. 25; 139. 6); Vait. I. 5; GB. i. i. 28, 39; 2. 9, 18 
(end); 3. i, 2, 4. The teito is familiar in the Parisistas and in the AV. Anukra- 
mani; cp, Weber, Omina und Portenta, p. 346 ff.; Weber, Verz. IL 89 ff.; SBE. 
XLII, p. XXVI ff. — 12 See the passages cited SBE, XLII, p. xxvn, note. — 13 See 
ib. p. xxviir, note. — H See Weber, Verz. II, 88 ff. — J5 SBE. XLII, p. xxvui; 
Weber, Verz. IL 96 (cp. also 919 and 921). 


D. THE SCHOOLS OF THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 

S 10. Character and sources of the reports on the schools of 
the AV. — Hindu tradition has fixed upon the number nine as expressing the 
extent to which the Atharvanic collections of hymns, or their employment in 
the hands of the Atharvanic practitioners was diversified by differences of 
treatment in Atharvanic schools (sdkhd, carana^ hhedd). Numerical statements 
of this sort are apt to be apocryphal; and the differences which represent to 
the Hindu mind sufficient reason for positing an independent sdkkd vary 
greatly in scope and importance. They may be due to genuine differences 
in the extent and arrangement of the hymn-collections themselves; to differ- 
ences of ritualistic employment of one and the same hymn-collection {sfdra- 
sdkha)\ to the existence of independent Upani.^ads among the votaries of 
the same /ri^^ff-products in all other respects; or to other more trivial points, 
at times of great obscurity L These differences great and small are lumped 
together in the traditional Atharvanic count of nine sakhas, without perspective 
or sense of proportion; their analysis, moreover, is rendered somewhat un- 
certain owing to the modulations which the names of the sakhas have been 
subjected to in the course of time, inside and outside of the Atharvan, and 
even more by the portentous amount of blundering report on the part of the 
scribes unacquainted with these names. 

The reports on the Atharvan sakhas are from the following sources : 

1. The two Cara^avyuhas: one, counted as the fifth Parisi§ta of the White 
Yajur-Veda, registers the schools of the AV. in chapter one; another, figuring 
as the 49* Parisi^ta of the AV., treats the same subject in briefer form. — 

2. Incidental mention in Pacini, the Mahabha§ya, and other grammatical litera- 
ture. — 3. The very late over-systematic reports of the Purauas, and other 
late literature, e. g. the Samskaraganapati of Ramakr^^a. ' — 4* Incidental 
mention throughout the literature of the Atharvan, to which may be added 
Sayaija^s list of the sakhas in the introduction to his commentary to the AV., 
p. 25®. — Saya^a’s statement coincides with that of the AV. Caranavyuha, 
and it would seem that these two authorities present a correct list of the 
sakhas as known in their day: the different versions of other texts are due 
to blunders, and more or less conscious malformations and additions on the 
part of writers farther removed from the sphere of the Atharvan. Accordingly 
the traditional nine sakhas are as follows: 

§ II. The nine sakhas of the AV. - i. The Paippalada (also, Paip- 
paladaka, Paippaladi, Pippalada, Paippala, Paippalayana, &c.), a patronymic 
derived from the name of a teacher Pippaladi. In the Atharvan literature 
itself th^se names do not appear prior to the Parisistas and the Upanisads A 



12 


IL Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Braiimana. 


being unknown even in Kaus., Vait, and GB. The name occurs as the 
designation of a group of mantras which figure as an appendix to the Na- 
ksatrakalpa, whenever that text figures as the first Parisista; these mantras 
are in fact derived from AVPh Again, AY. 19. 56—58 in the Sannaklya 
are designated as paippaldda-ma^itrah at the end of Ath. Parii 8. This is 
significant in the light of the close relationship of book 19 of AV. with AVP. 
The so-called pippaiddi-santi-gana^ Ath. Paris. 34. 20, begins with the pratika, 
Siim no docd (viilgata i. 6) which is in all probability the opening verse of 
dv* Kashmirian sakha. Further Ath. Paris. 2. 3, 6; 23. 10; 24. 14; 41. Caland, 
Ahnencult, p. 96, 107, 24^ ff., has reconstructed a considerable pait of a 
Paippalada-sraddhakalpa, and surmises that the school of the Paippalada is 
older than the Saunakiya. The tradition of the Atharvan Upanisads distributes 
thein largely, and very secondarily, among the two more important schools, 
the Saunaka and the Paippalada ; one of the older Upanisads, the Prasna, is 
regularly and probably with good reason assigned to the Paippalada \ Cp. 
also the ,end of Garbha-Up. The Brahma-Up. opens with a conversation 
between Saunaka and Pippalada. The name occurs also frequently in the 
colophons of Atharvanic writings, and is contained in all systematic reports 
of the sakhas, Atharvanic and otherwise ^ 

2. The Tauda or Taudayana, written frequently, Stauda and Staudayana. 
Appears in the literature itself only Ath. Paris. 23. 3, d ska7idhdd uraso vd *pi 
’ti staiiddyajiaUi smrtd (sc. arani/i). The sakha-reports have propagated this 
name with a brood of variants, often of the most ignorant character, contri- 
buting nothing to the real history of the name?. 

3. The Mauda or Maudayana are mentioned several times ;‘n the Pari- 
sistas. Especially, an interesting passage, 2. 4, declares that only Saunaka and 
Paippalada priests are fit to be Purohitas, whereas the kingdom whose spiritual 
care is in the hands of priests of the jalada or Mauda schools rapidly goes 
to destruction^. Otherwise the names occur Ath. Paris. 23. 3 (mauda), and 
24. 10 (mauddjana), and in all systematic accounts of the sakhils with the 
usual corruptions 9 . 

4. The Saunaklya or vSaunakin. The tenn Saunakin occurs by the side 
of Devadarsin, Kaus. 85. 8. At Vait. 43. 25 a satmaka-^ssicnfice is prescribed 
for such as desire to become adepts in sorcery (sau 7 iakayajrw ^ bhkdrakdmasya ) : 
the force and originality of this testimony^ is somewhat impaired by the occurrence 
of a similar statement KB. 4. 7 (cp. SS. 3. 10. 7), as we may not be sure that 
the RV. Brahmana has in mind an Atharvan doctor. In Ath. Paddh. at Kaus. 
I. 6 the Vait. is cited as Saunaklya-sutra; the title of the published Prati- 
sakhya of the AV, (vulgata) is Saunaklya Caturadhyayika’'®: and the terms 
saunaka, s'autiaki, and saufiaklya ,are common in the AV. Parisi.5tas. The 
Atharvan Upanisads also regard Saunaka as one of their great ^teachers 
(Mundaka 1. 1. 3 ; Brahma i) ; one of them appears under the name of Saunaka- 
Upanifiad (Shavank, in Anquetil’s translation)*', and the commentators on 
these texts are apt to ascribe them for the most part either to the school of 
Saunaka or to that of Paippalada. Finally all the systematic reports of the 
sakhas present the name, though often corrupted almost beyond recognition*®. 

5. The Jajala. The form of this name, which is obscured by the usual 
blunders in the systematic reports, may be considered as established on the 
strength of the unequivocal statement Ath. Parii 23. 2, InUumdird devadarMp^ 
jdjalair urumdtrikd (sc. aramk); cp. Sayana, Introduction, p. 25. The dsd7ya^ 
eponymous of the school seems to have been Jajali, as reported by the ]\Iaha- 
bhasya'A 

6. 'Jlie Jalada, mentioned in the polemic statement, Ath. Parii 2. 4, 



1. 'I'iiK Atiiarva-Vkda is ui;N'i:KAi.. — 1). 'J'nK Schools of thf A.-V. 13 

re|)orted above under Mauda. In addition ja/iK/ch'a/icr, Atli. Paris. 23. 2jya/a- 
i/dj>a/i( 7 ir viiastir va (sc. aranih) sotjak V/ tu bhdr^avah. 

7. The Jhalimavada. Not found in Athurvan literature outside of the 
Caranavyuha; the outside reports of the sakhas all present the name^ mostly 
with \ ariants more or le.ss corrupt. 

S./Phe Devadarsa or Devadar.sin. They occur Kaus. 85. 7; in opposition 
to the Saunakin; in the grammatical gana saunaka in tlie form devadarsa ninah; 
and in Ath. Paris. 23. 2, see above under 5. The sakha-lists in spite of great 
corruption intend the same name. 

9. I'he Caranavaidya. hlentioned by Kesava at Xaus. 6. 37, and Ath. 
Paris. 23. 2: cd 7 'anavaidyair jaghfie ca inaudejid' stCiilguldnl ca (length of the 
a 7 ^ani). The sakha-lists all have the name. 

S 12. Estimate of the historical value of the sakhas, and their 
relation to the teachers ^of the Sutras. — Aside from a difference of 
opinion on the part of tlie Saunakin and Devadarsin in a trivial matter of 
measurements at Kaus. 85.7,8; and the polemic confrontation of the Saunakin 
and Paippalada with the iNIauda and Jalada (above under 3), the only direct 
statement as to the belongings of these sakhas is, that Kausika’s Sutra ^vas 
used by four of them, the Saunakiya, Jajala, jalada, and Prahniavada^h With 
the exception of the names Saunaka (°kin) and Devadarsa (^sin) neither Kaus., 
Vait., nor GB. include these sakha-names among those of the teachers to whom 
they have occasion to refer The Rishis and teachers of GB. are largely 
non-Atharvanic and wholly unusable for a reconstruction of Atharvan literary 
history, owing to the licentious way in which this late text has pilfered the 
entire Brahmanic literature'^. Those of Kaul and Vait, on the other hand, 
have the true ring: Kausika, Yuvan Kausika, Bhagali, I\lathara, Saunaka 
(Kaus. and Vait), Gargya, Parthasravasa, Kahkayana, Paribabhrava, jatikayana, 
Kaurupathi, Isuphali and Devadarsa (Kaus.). In addition Kaui 140. x8 and 
Vait I. 3; 5. 13; 7. 16 mention dcaryCih in the plural; both te.xts refer also 
to nameless authorities {eke^ iiy d/ia/i)^'. The absence of these names from 
the Mkhndist t)f itself stamps the latter as an exceedingly late evolution, 
quite as late or later than the theory of the five Atharvanic Kalpas. Just 
as it is impossi].)le to explain the elevation of the insignificant Slintikalpa to 
a p)lace among the five Kalpas by the side of the real Sutras of the *\V., 
whereas the equally trivial Asiirlkalpa must content itself with a place among 
the Parisi.stas''\ so it is impossible to say why the Carapavaidya, Mauda, and 
Jalada figure as sakhas whereas the Bhargava who are mentioned with them, 
Ath. Paris. 23. 2, are excluded from this honor. Several of the srikhd-names 
are not patronymics; they seem to point to professional phases of Atharvanic 
life rather than to school-differences. Thus the Brahmavada seem to allude 
to the function of Atharvan theologians as Brahmans (fourth priests) at the 
Srauta-cereraonies'^; the Caranavaidya to the profession of wandering medicine- 
men; and jalada (Svater-giveP) to the exceedingly common sorceries with 
water Anyhow, the sakha-list is a medley of things of very different iin- 

jiortancc, and the tradition that the KauL is the book of rites {sam/iiia-vid/ii) 
of four of these sakhas indicates pretty clearly that these ‘schoor-difFerences 
did not extent in every case to the Samhitas themselves, nor even to different 
Sutras of the same Samhita., 

S 13. The two Samhita-sakhas, the Saunakiya and the Paip- 
palada, — At this date there have been found no texts representing either 
Sainhitri-sakhas, or Sutra-sakhas, in addition to, the vulgate Samhita and the 
Kashmirian Saiiihita. That the vulgate, together with Kaui, Vait, and GB-, 
belongs to the school of Saunaka may be regarded as certain. The AV. Piati- 



14 11. Lfi'Erature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 

sakhya bears the title Saunaklya Catiiradhyayika: it is the phonetic pftanual of 
the vulgate, and no other text^k The Ath. Paddh,, at Kaus. i. 6, designates 
Vait. as the SannakTya-sutra; the dependence of Vait upon Kaus. is certain: 
the Kaui is therefore also a Sutra of the Saunakin^^. The tradition alluded 
to above, that Kaus. is catasrsu sdkhasu saunakddisu samhiidvidhili points to 
the same conclusion ^ independently, as does also Kaus. 85. 7, 8 where the 
Sutra sides with the Saunakin against the Devadarsin. Again the Kaus. cites 
the initial hymn of the vulgate {ye truapfali) as purvam (or, truapMyam) suktam, 
and in general cites its hymns by pratika, reproducing occasional orthogra- 
phical or textual blunders: the school-correspondence of the two texts is quite 
complete On the other hand Kaus. as well as Vait, quote hymns from the 
Kashmirian version in full (sakalapdthd)'^‘‘\ they cannot therefore belong to 
the Paippalada. Being themselves SaunakTya, the vulgata is by this perfect 
correspondence also stamped as SaunakTya, as there is no evidence that this 
term was the designation of a special Sutra-sakha. 

Hardly less conclusive is the evidence that the Kashmirian Sarnhita 
belongs to the school of the Paippalada, in accordance with the statements 
in the colophons of the Tiibingen MS. of that Veda^^. The text is there 
described as dtharvanikdpaippaidda-sdkhd. The evidence of the Parisistas on 
this point is given above under Paippalada (p. 12): especially significant is 
the pippalddi sdntigana^ Ath. Paris. 34. 20 (Kaus. 9. 7, note), doubtless so 
called because it begins with the pratika sam no dan^ the probable opening 
verse of AVP. The fact that the name paippalada is found associated rather 
loosely with Atharvan productions in general^ is paralleled frequently in the 
history of theVedic sakhas and is not sufficient to cast doubt upon this con- 
clusion. Neither Brahmaija nor Sutras seem to have been preserved in this 
school; at least neither Vedic nor Atharvan literature have the least thing to 
say about any such works. The discovery of this sakha in a single birch bark 
MS, was due to the ingenuity and the efforts of Roth: the reasons which led 
this scholar to surmise its existence, a history of its discovery, and a brief 
comparison of it with the vulgate was published by him in a Tubingen Pro- 
gramme in 1875, entitled ‘Der Atharvaveda in Kaschmir’; cp. the same 
author in the Atti dB IV. Congresso Internazionale degli orientalisti, vol. II, 
p. 89—96. A photographic reproduction of the Tubingen MS. is proposed 
by the present author ^7. The readings of the Paippalada texts jn those parts 
of the Veda which correspond with the Saunakiya are to be presented in 
Whitney^s posthumous translation and critical apparatus of the SaunakTya 
Connected passages of AVP. are occasionally cited in full in Kau.i and Vait ; 
the Paippalada form ofAV. 11.2 appears in a Rcaka of the Kathaka school, 
described by von Schroeder®*^. Sayana in his commentary to the SaunakTya 
occasionally adopts readings from the Paippalada 3 '*. 

14* Brief account of the Paippalada-sakhii. — The AVP. like 
the SaunakTya is divided into 20 books, subdivided into anuvakas and suktas; 
the latter, like the books themselves, are sometimes designated as kaiidas. 
The relation of AVP. to the vulgata (represented in the secjuel by the num- 
bers in brackets) is as follows: the opening stanza of AVP. was in all proba- 
bility the stanza laffi dem (i, i. 6), as was surmised by Roth, p. 16; the 
opening stanza of the SaunakTya, ye trisaptdh, heads the second anuvaka of 
the first book of AVP. 3 \ The pratikas of the remaining books are: 2. arasam 
prdcyam (4. 7. i); 3. d tvd gan (3. 4. i); 4. Mranyagarbhas (4, 2, 7); 

piiangahdhvai sindhujdtdyai\ 6 . tad id dsa (5,2.1); 7. suparnas fud (5,14. 

8. kathd diva asurdya (5. ii. i); ' 9. urdhvd asya (5. 27. i); 10. na tad vido 
yadi r'l. vrsd te'ham\ 12. imafii stonmm arhate (20,13.3); ^3* takmdmm 



I The Atharva-Veda in General. — E. Brief Sketch of A. Literature. 15 


(5. 22. i); 14. indrasya nu (2. 5. 5); 15. samyag digMya^i; 16. antakdya 

(8.1.1)^; 17. saiyam brhad rtam (12. i. i); 18. satye?ioitabhitd (14. i. i); 

19. dop gdya (6. i. i); 20. dhiti vd ye (7. i. i). 

Books 1 — 7 of the Sauiiaklya reappear for the most part in AVR; 8 — {4 
almost completely. Of 15 there is only the beginning; 16 and 17 appear 
for the most part On the other hand the funeral-hymns, book i8, are 
wanting entirely. Of the two supplementary books, 19 and 20, the latter 
including the J^mitdpa-hymus is wanting in AVR, except those stanzas which 
are not kuntdpa and are not borrowed from the book 19 with the 

exception of about 12 of its^72 hymns is scattered through theAVF., showing 
that this supplement to the Saunaklya is largely derived from its sister-sakha. 
The arrangement of the two Vedas is to a certain extent on parallel lines: 
books I — 5 of the SaunakTya are contained in i — 9 of AVP.; books 8 — ii 
in the large book 16; book 12 in 17; books 13, 14, 16, 17 in 18: the one 
notable divergence concerns 6 and 7 of the SaunakTya: they appear in 19 
and 20 of AVP. The variations between the two texts range all the way 
from inconsiderable variants to complete change of sense. Perfect textual 
correspondence between parallel stanzas and hymns of the two sakMs is 
comparatively rare. About one eighth or one ninth of AVP. is original, being 
found neither in the SaunakTya nor in any other of the accessible collections 
of mantras 33 . 

I Cp. Oldenberg, Die Hymnen des Rig-Veda, p. 430 ff. — 2 See, Max 
HASL. p. 371; Weber, IS. I. 152, 296; HI. 277*— Sj XIII. 434—5; Omina und 
Portenta, p. 412 — 3; WL.^ p. 170; Rajendralalamitra in the introduction to the 
Gopatha-BrShmana, p. 6; Sabdahalpadruma, s. v, veda\ Roth, D.er AV. in Kasclimir, 
p. 24ff, ; Simon, Beitraege zur KennUiiss der vedischen Schulen, p. 31; Bloomfield, 
JAOS. XI. 377 -~S; Kausika, Introduction, p. xxxiff. ~ 3 See Jacob’s Concordance, 
under pippaldda^ and paippulada, — 4 See Roth, AV, in Kasclimir, p. 12; the 
mantras are printed in, Bloomfield, Seven Hymns of the AV., AJPh. VII, 486— 7. 
— 5 See CoLEBRooKE, Essays !«, p. 93; Deussen, Sechzig Upanishad’s, pp. 531, 
559* — ^ See Kaui, Intro d., p. xxxiir. — t 7 See, ibid. p. xxxiv. — 8 JAOS. XL 
378 note. — 9 Kaus., ibid. — 10 Whitney, JAOS. VII. 333 ff. — Deussen, 
Sechzig Upanishad’s, p. 867 ff. — Kaui, ibid. xxxv. — IS. XIIL 435, — 
*4 Ssyana, Introduction, p. 25, and Ke^ava and Atharvapaddhati in their respective 
introductions. — ^5 JAOS- XT. 385; Gopathabrahmana, List of proper names, at the 
beginning of the edition, — See below $ 65, 66. — ^7 See the indexes, especially KauL 
p. 373. — iS JAOS. XT. 378 ff. ; Kaul Introd. p, xxxvi; Magoun, Asurlkalpa, AJPh. X. 
165 ff. ; cp. below, $ 16. — *9 See below, $ 33' — 20 Cp. SBE- XTJI, Index, under ‘waters’; 
and the items; apam suktani, abhisekagana, fivah^ makasanti^ sambhumayMd, saiilaw\ 
etc. kiKaul, Index B, p.383ff, — 21 The Kaus. follows some of the orthoepic peciili.arities 
of the vulgate as described by AV. Pratis.; see Kaul, Introd., p. xxxviii. ~ 22 xhe GB. 
is in turn dependent upon Vait. and exhibits no independent school-traits; see 
below S 64. — 23 Kaul Introd. p. xxxvmff. — 24 Kaus. 72; 91 ; 107; 115; Vait 
10. 17; 14. l; 24. I : see Roth, AV. in Kaschmir, p. 23; Garbe, Vaitana-vSutra 
(text), p. vxi; JAOS. XT. 377. — 25 Roth, ibid. p. 12; Kau^. Introd- p. xxxiiL — 
26 So, e. g., the Prasna-Upanisad, because the teacher Pippaladi figures in it; see 
above, p. I2; Kaui. ibid.; Whitney, Index verborum, p. 2, note. — 27 JAOS. 
Vol. XX, p. 184 ff, — 28 See, JAOS. XV, p, CLXXIII. — 29 See note 24; v, Sciiroe- 
DER, Die Tiibinger Katha-Handschriften, p. 14 ff. (SWAW. 1898, voL CXXXVIf, 
part IV; cp. IS. XVIII. 417). Some stanzas of AVP. are quoted also in GB.: see 
Roth, ibid. p. 23. — 30 Whitney, Festgruss an R. v. Roth, p. 92. — 3^ Cp. KaiiL 
Introd. p. xxxviL — 3 * See Whitney, Index Verborum, p. 2; cp. below § 62. — 
33 See, Roth, ibid- p. 15—20. 

K BRIEF SKETCH OF ATHARVANIC LITERATURE. 

$ X5. The Samhitas, Sutras, and Brahmaua. ^ — The literature of 
the Atharvan comprises the two collections of hymns connected by tradition 
respectively with the schools of Saunaka and Paippalada^. The latter exists 
only in a single hitherto unpublished sainhita-mdnuscript without pada-patha 



1 6 II. Litkra'I'ure and Hist( )Rv. i r. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Br AH^r an a. 


or commentary; the former in numerous mss. of both samhita and pada- 
patha, except that no pada-text of the so-called ^unhi/’a-hyiims has as yet 
come to light^; it probably does not exist at all. It has been edited by 
Roxir and Whitney (Berlin 1855). The pada-patha of the Saunakiya is 
characterized in relation to other ])ada-texts by Weiier^ IS. XIIL 6 ff. It is 
particularly blundering in the corrupt book 1 9, but also liable to serious error 
elsewhere; e.g., it divides stuvannemi into siuvafi nemi^ instead of 
(4.28.3^), or yadydma7n into yad yamain^ instead oi yady dniam (6. 116. i‘‘). 
A fragmentary commentary on the Saunakiya with an elaborate introduction^ 
containing a valuable sketch of the more important accessory Atharvan texts, 
and an Atharvanic view of the character and importance of the AV., is as 
usual ascribed to Sayana; this commentary is now in the course of publica- 
tion^. The most important accessory text of the AV. is the Sutra of Kausika^. 
It comprises, along with a good deal of peculiar matter, the themes ordinarily 
treated in the Grhya-sutras, and, in addition, what may be called an Atliarva- 
Sutra proper, or a Vidhaiia-Sutra: cp. the frequent designation of the text as 
samhitd‘VidhP. ' The Kaus. belongs to the Saunakiya-school, or to a school 
deviating from the Saunakiya only in minor matters; there is however a later 
tradition that it was used, as the Sutra of four of the Atharvanic schools or 
sakhas, the Saunakiya at the head^. In addition to the commentary of Darila, 
the Paddhati of Kesava, and other minor Paddhatis, the Kaus. seems also to 
have been commented upon by Bhadfa and Rudra 7 ; judging from quotations 
of these writers (Kaus. p. 312, 338, and 352) their works are composed in 
slokas of a late Smrti- character. The Atharvan has also a Srauta-sutra, the 
authorless Vaitana-Sutra which also belongs to the school of Saunaka; the 
published text contains eight adhyayas^: an appendix called Yajiiapr ayascitta- 
sutra, or Vaitayana, consists of six adhyayas which are as yet unedited 
Shankar Pandit in the introduction to AV. ii . 2 mentions a commentary on 
Vait, called Aksepa by Somaditya. The relation of Vait. to Kaul and the 
AV. Samhita is quite peculiar as compared with the inter-relation of the cor- 
responding^ texts in other schools. As a rule the Grhya-sutras are dependent 
upon the Srauta-sutras; they refer to them familiarly, and do not describe a 
second time performances which have been treated in the Srauta*sutras. The 
two Atharvan Sutras- reverse this relation: there is no point in which Kaus. 
depends upon Vait.; on the other hand the dependence of Vait. upon Kaus. 
is apparent at almost every step. The Vait. treats the Kaus. as though it 
were a Samhita; the ritual practices and independent mantras of fcaus. are 
taken for granted, and alluded to as understood by and known to the srauta- 
priests practicing withVait Prom the point of view of the other Srauta-sutras the 
Vait may be judged as follows: it is not the product of practices in srauta- 
ceremonies which have slowly and gradually developed in a certain high 
priestly school, but a somewhat conscious product, made at a time when the 
Atharvavedins ‘began to feel the . need of a distinctive Srauta-manual to support 
their claim that the AV. is a canonical Veda of independent and superior char- 
acter. Vait I. 8 acknowledges its dependence upon the Yajur-Veda^*^. To the 
Saunaka-school belongs also the single Brahmana of the AV,, tHe Gopatha- 
brahmaiia which is in turn later than and dependent upon the Vaitana: see S ^4* 
S The Kalpas and the Parisistas. — With the above-mentioned 
Sutras three other texts of slight intrinsic importance are associated: Hindu 
tradition persistently states that the ritual literature attached to the AV. con- 
sists of five Kalpas The (/^n'£r-);;/F;?«fJ;^j‘a-teacher Upavarsa’^^ goes so far 
as to assert that these five are sruii (vcdatulyd)^ contrasting them with others 
that are sinrtitulya'^'^. Priests practicing with these five kalpas are known as 



L The Atharva-Veda ix General. — E. Brief Sketch of A. Literature. 17 


pahcakalpa ox pancakaipin^^. The rather variable nomenclature , of these texts 
is: I. The Kausika-sutra, or Samhita-vidhi, or Samhita-kalga. 2. TheYaitana- 
sutra, or Vitaiia-kalpa 3. The Naksatrakalpa. 4. The Santi-kalpa. 5. The 
Ahgirasa-kalpa, or Abhicara-kalpa, or Vidhana-kalpa. The last three are 
Parisistas, intrinsically not at all more interesting than many of the 
numerous Atharvan texts of that class: why they ‘should have been deemed 
worthy of a place by the side, of the real Sutras does not appear. No 
mss. of the Ahgirasa-kalpa have as yet come to hand, nor are there any 
announced in the ms. catalogues: our previous surmise that the text would 
bear upon the sixth book of Kaui is rendered probable by Sayana’s brief 
summary of its contents (introd. p. 28). The Naksatrakalpa is called a Pari- 
sista outright, and is fretpiently founds at the head of the Paris ista-mss.; this 
text, as well as the still more trivial Santikalpa are in the main of an astro- 
noinic-astrologic character The Parisistas, according to Hatfield’s count 
72 in number '^vith a great variety of subjects; leaving aside the Na- 

ksatrakalpa (nr. i) and its appendix, the so-called Paippalada Mantrah (nr. 
they begin with a considerable number of texts in the nature of nljakarmani 
(ro}'al rites), and end with a little less numerous a class of adbhutani (omens 
and portents), thus continuing in tliese, as in other cases, the tradition of the 
Kaus. (14—17, and adhyaya XIII). A considerable number of these texts are 
devoted to grammatical, text-historical, or astronomical subjects, of a degree 
of interest that calls for a critical edition of the entire collection. Quite a 
number of them are even now edited or adequately discussed: the Paippalada 
Manj:rah (i^j have been reproduced by Bloomfield the Indraniahotsava (19) 
is very similar to the corresponding chapter, Kaus. 140; the Skandayaga or 
Dhurtakalpa (20), a kind of a thieves’ manual, has been edited and trans- 
lated by Goodwin the Ganamfila (32) is worked up in connection with 
the corresponding groups in the Kau.s.=*°; the Asurlkalpa (35), a witch-craft 
practice undertaken with the (?r//rJ-pIant, has been edited and translated, with 
the aid of a native commentary, by M.agoun-^; the Sraddhakalpa (44) has 
been edited and translated by Caland^^; the Uttaniapatala (46) is treated 
in part by Weber the Kautsavya-(or, Kautsavaya-)niruktanighantu (48) has 
been commented upon and compared with Yaska’s Nighantu by Bloomfield*-^; 
the Carai]iavyuha (49) is discussed by Weber ^5- the Grahayuddha (51) has 
been edited by Weber the Adbhutasanti (67) is for the most part repro- 
duced and translated by Weber the Ausanasadbhutani has been edited 
and translated by Hatfield Aside from Parisistas and Paddhatis there 
exist also mss. of certain prayer and ritual books of a yet slighter im- 
portance and probably later date than the Parisistas; e. g. an Atharva- 
tarpanam; the Atharvairapramitaksara of Vasudeva; the Sodasopacarapuja; and 
r^//<2xm-texts ^ 5 . Hemadri in the Vratakhai.i[]ia of the Caturvargacintamaipi 
presents an Atharvakavidhana^ For an Atharvavedoktam jyotisam written by 
a paucakafpin see Weber, Yerz. 11 , p. 96; for a similar text called Aranyaka 
jyotisam, Haug, IS, IX. 174, 

% 17. On the Smrti of Paithinasi. — The question raised by the pre- 
sent author^^ as to whether Paithinasi, the reputed .author of a work on dkarma, 
belongs to the AY., has been answered in the affirmative by Pischel^^, Ca- 
land- 33 , JoLLV^h and Hillebrandt^s. Pischel regards Paithmasi as the author 
of a Dharma-sastra in mixed prose and slokas; Caland and Jolly as the 
author of a Dharmasutra. And Cauand concludes that Paithmasi was at any 
rate an Atharvanic writer, because the Sraddhakalpa of this author recon- 
structed from Hemadri’s citations, is related to the Atharvan srdddka-texts'^^. 
It would seem possible, however, that there existed more than one PaithinasL 

Indo-Aryan Research. 11. 1 i>. 2 ■ 



1 8 IL Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 

The Atharvanlya-paddhati describes him as an author of a Paddhati; the 
citations in the Atharvanic commentaries 37 seem to point to a knowledge of 
special Atharvanic rites so particular as to make it seem quite likely that 
some Paithinasi was the author of a very late metrical text, dependent directly 
upon the Kausika* Paithinasi in the Parisi§tas is called Mausallputra; he seems 
also not likely to have been the author of the d/zarma-text in question. At any 
rate it will be well to remember that if all references to Paithinasi are intended 
for the d/tarma-vfiiiQX it will not be easy to assign to him too late a date. 

% i8. The Atharvan Upanisads. — With the AV, are associated 
traditionally the great mass of the Upanisads 3 *^, in fact all except those that 
belong definitely to schools of the other three Vedas. Some of these, even, 
appear in Atharvanic recensions, e. g., the Kena (SV.), Bhrguvalil, Ananda- 
valli (Taittirlya-Upanisads === TA. 8 and 9), and Brhannarayaiia («= INIahana- 
rayana = TA. 10) 39. What ought to be an authoritative statement of the 
number and names of the Atharvan Upanisads is the list of 27 presented by 
the 49^^^ Parisista, the Carariavyuha'^®; they are: i. Mundaka. 2. Prasna. 
3. Brahmavidya. 4. Ksurika. 5. Culika. 6. Atharvasiras. 7. Atharvasikha. 
8. Garbha. 9. Maha. 10. Brahma, ii. Pranagnihotra. 12. Mantiukya. 13. Nada- 
bindu. 14. Brahmabindu. 15. Amrtabindu. 16. Dhyanabindu. 17. Tejobindu. 
18. Yogasikha. 19, Yogatattva. 20. Nllarudra. 21. Pancatapini (napanlya). 
2 2.Ekadap.d[isamnyasa. 23. Aruiii. 24. Hainsa. 25. Paramahamsa. 26. Narayaija. 
27. Vaitathya. The majority of the names in this list require no explanation: 
the Pancatapaniya is doubtless the Nrsimhapurvatapam; one ms. reads Dvita- 
panTya, having in mind probably the additional NrsimhottaratapanT. The term 
Ekadaiidisamnyasa is otherwise unknown as a designation of an Upani^ad: 
the stem ekadami'm (cp. schol. to PL. 19. 4. 7) occurs in Brahma 3; Parama- 
harasa 3; and Gopichandana 5; cp. the ms. listed as a Dharmasastra under 
the title Ekadatulisamnyasavidhih, by Saunaka, in Stein’s Catalogue of Sanskrit 
MSS. at Jammu, p. 84. I do not venture to assume that the text is identical 
with the well-known Samnyasa-Upani^ad. The Vaitathya is the independent 
name of the second of the four parts of Gaudapada’s Karika to the Maudukya, 
all of which are usually counted as independent Upanisads The presence 
in this list of the work of a personal author makes for the belief that it, 
like all other Upanisad lists, is late and eclectic, representing the learning of 
some particular scholar or coterie of scholars. It does not coincide with any 
other historical collection, as, e. g., the collection of the Miiktika-LTpani^ad ; 
the Persian translation of the Oupnekhat in Anquetil-Duperron’s Latin trans- 
lation; Naray ana’s collection; Coi.ebrooke’s collection; or the lists of the 
Chambers collection JTyananda’s ‘Atharvanopanishaf (Calcutta 1891}, to 
be sure, contains 29 Upanisads, but they are copied, apparently, from the 
unfinished edition in five fasciculi, printed in the Bibliotheca Inclica. They 
also are the result of an independent selection of the minor Upanisads, difiering 
from that of the Parisista in the choice and order of the texts, lliere is in 
fact no complete collection of Upanisads, because the term Upanisad does 
not represent a closed canon but an indefinitely extensible type of literature 
Svhich has not been formally concluded and which may yet be continued in 
the present or the future’. The number ofUpanisad-names counted by Weber 
in i 876 '^ 3 was all in all 235, including apocrypha; even a Moslemic Allopani^ad 
figures aniong them. The judgment of the intrinsic and historical value of 
the Atharvan Upanisads does not therefore depend upon any one collection; 
their value — in the first instance their historical value — depends upon the 
degree of regularity with which they occur in the collections. Even so it is 
obvious that literary products of the most diversified character (cp*, e. g., the 



I. The Atharva-Veda in General. — E. Brief Sketch of A. Literature. 19 


Garuda, a snake-charm) have found their way into the principal collections, 
all of which are probably relatively late, so that finally the chronology and 
the value of each Upanisad will have to be determined by its style, contents 
and other inner criteria 

Deussen, extending and developing a suggestion of Weber, divides the 
Atharvan-Upani^ads into five clearly defined classes i. Pure Vedanta-Upani- 
sads, i, e., such as continue the Vedanta doctrines of the older texts without 
undue development of the notions of (concentration, and abstraction from 
all mundane matters), samnydsa (asceticism), or Sivaitic or Visnuitic symbolism, 
beyond where these ideas had developed in the older Up anisads. 2. Yoga-Upann 
§ads, i. e., such as presuppose the Vedanta ideas, and in- addition advise con- 
centration upon the morae of the sound om. especially its last half mora 
(nada), 3. Samnyasa-Upani§ads, i. e., those which recommend and describe 
a life of asceticism as the practical result of the doctrines ^ of the Upanisads. 

4, ^va-Upanisads, i. e., such as interpret the popular god Sva or one__ of his 
murtis (Isana, Mahesvara, Mahadeva, etc.) as a personification of the Atman. 

5. Vi^nu-Upanisads, i. e., those which similarly transform Visi>u or one of his 
avatdras (Narayana, Nirsimha, Rama, Krsna) into human manifestations of the 
Atman. Of these classes the first (cp. AV. 10. 7 and 8; ii. 4 and 8), the 
third (cp. AV. ii. 5) and the fourth (cp. AV. 4. 28; ii. 2) might be expected 
to be in organic touch with the hymns of the AV. But this is not the case: 
the Atharvan Upani§ads are connected with the AV. Samhita by ties that 
are but little more close than those that connect them with the Vedic man- 
tras in general. There is one notable exception, the Culika, which presents 
(sloka I o ff.) characteristically as '‘inantropanisad^ an almost complete catalogue 
of the cosmogonic and theosophic hymns of the AV., naming them by well- 
selected catch- words, such as brahmacarin (ii. 5), skamhka (10. 7 and 8), 
ucckista (ii. 7), etc.'^^ Otherwise the Atharvan hymns are cited only sporad- 
ically, not more frequently or familiarly than mantras of the other Vedas •^7, In 
addition the relation of these texts to the AV. is of the loosest sort: they 
are apt to add the name of the AV. to that of the trayi more regularly than 
the older Upahi^ads'^®, and the names of their holy Rishis^ are to a con- 
siderable extent those of earlier as well as later Atharvanic tradition: Athapan, 
Angiras (from which Mun(Jaka i. i. 2 abstracts Angir), Bhrgu, Saunaka, Pippa- 
ladi. The last two are the names of two Atharvan schools, being the only 
names of the traditional sakhas that are mentioned in the AV. Upanisads. 
With one or the other of these two school-names the commentators are apt to 
associate loosely and inconsistently the individual Upanisads as special school- 
products Colebrooke, e. g., reports that the first fifteen in his count belong 
to the Saunaka-school; or the colophon of the Prasna states that itself J)elongs 
pippaldddtharvane iakhayd 7 niS)^- But, aside again from the Culika which 
distinctly refers to the Saunakiya, there is little or nothing in the texts them- 
selves that binds them to one or the other Atharvan school, or for that 
matter, to the AV. itself, as a whole. This is rather striking at the first glance, 
because the theosophic hymns of the AV. seem to herald the Upanisad specu- 
lations more loudly than the theosophic mantras of the other Vedas, and 
because the later ritual literature of the AV., notably the GB., professes to 
be devoted to a knowledge of the brahma. The GB., moreover, notably in 
its first prapathaka, resembles the Upanisads in diction and style ; especially 
its speculations on the syllable cm remind one of the j/^^^<2-class of Upanisads. 
Indeed one of the treatises of GB., the <?»i-cosmogony 5 ^ was regarded as a,n 
Upanisad by the Persian translators: the Pranou (Pranava) in Anquetil’s 
translation is almost identical with GB. i,. i. 16— -30, a fact which will be of 



20 IL Literature and History, i r. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Br 7 \hmana, 


especial interest to Weber and Deussen^^. Another treatise, that on the 
gdyain (GB. i. i. 31 — 38)^^ describes itself at the end as an Upanisad: it 
also suggests, without being at all like it, the Shavank of Anquetii/s Oiipne- 
khat54. But there was probably, nevertheless, a greater break in time between 
Mantra and Upani§ad in the AV. than in the other Vedas: the older AV. 
Upanisads doubtless grew up in priOvStly communities that practiced with the 
AV.; the more secondary and recent ones are the products of later mystic, 
ascetic, and sectarian speculations which were compelled to associate them- 
selves also with the AV., because less rigid school discriinination obtained 
at ail times in the AV., and because the canons of the other Vedic schools 
were definitely closed. As it is texts like the Jabala or the Niiarudra (cp, 
VS. 16 and 13) are in some aspects paradoxical members of a collection 
that professes to be Atharvanic. The bibliography and contents of the 
Atharvan Upanisads may now be studied conveniently, aside from Weberns 
pioneer treatment, in connection with Deussen’s excellent translations with 
introductions (Sechzig Upanishad’s, p. 531 ff.). 

$ 19. Grammatical and text-historical treatises. — Of gramma- 
tical and text-historical books the most important is the AV. Pratisakhya, the 
so-called Saunaklya Caturadhyayika, in Whitney’s careful edition BOhlek 
has reported on another AV. Pratisakhya different from the preceding A 
grammatical text . called Atharvanasutra by Panimya seems to have been 
known to Trikan.damaiidana The so-called Nirukta-nighautu- of Kautsavya 
or Kautsavaya (Ath. Paris. 48) is a collection of glosses similar to Yaska’s 
Nighantu, not a mru/da<ext at alls^ Note also the Varnapatala, Ath. Parii 
47. The Caranavyuha and the Uttamapvatala, interesting for the history of 
Atharvan texts, have been mentioned above (p. 17). The unpublished Brhat- 
sarvanukramanika of the AV, is a very late and secondary text of that sort; its 
statements, especially those on the authorship of the hymns (mostly gods 
or semi-divine beings) are of minimal value 59. The Paiicapatalika is another 
text of the nature of an AnukramapT, mostly metrical^*. The Caranavyuha 
mentions four related texts as ^/aksa/jagran//id/f, namely, calurdd/ydylhr 
prdtisdkhyam pancamapatdikd{\) dam tyostd avid/nr br/iatsarvihiukrama?u 
A work on accentuation, the Svara-sastra was known traditionally to one of 
the Pandits of Shankar Pandit’s acquaintance 

Weber, Verse. I. S2 ff. ; II. 79 ff.; WL.2, p. 161 ff.; Bi.oomfield, JAOS. XL 375 ff.; 
IIiLLEBRANDT, Ritual-Litteratur, p. 35 ff. 

I Some data on tlie PaippalScla (A VP.) are presented (on Roth’s authority'! above, 
p. 14ff; for the Saunaklya see the entire second part of this book. — 2 See RoTH, 
AV. in Kaschmir, p. 8; Whitney, Index Yerborum, p. 4; the Zvw/( 7 /(Sf-hynins are 
analyzed below, 5 63. — 3 See the introductory notes below p. 40. — 4 The Kau- 
sika-Sutra of the Atharva-\'eda, with extracts from the commentaries of Dclrila and 
Kesava. Edited by Maurice Bi.oomfifxd (Vol XIV of JAOS.); cp. Hili.ebrandt, 
Ritual-Litteratur, p. 36. — 5 WiNDiscH, Literansche.s Centralblatt, Nov. 21, 1891, 
column 1663 ff. — 0 See above, p. 13; cp. PisciiEL, GGA., April 15, 1891, nr. S, 
p. 2S3. — 7 JAOS. XI, p. 376; Kaus. Introd. p. xv and xvu. — ^ Edited and 
translated by ‘Richard Garbe, respectively, London, 1S7S, and, Strassburg, 1S78. 
The Vait. begins with the words, a^/ia mduiasya. On a remote possibility of con- 
necting the Vaitana with the name Jvasyapa, see JAOS, XL 377. — 9 See Garbe, 
Introd. to his edition, p. v; Weber, Verz. II, p. 83; Eggeeing, Cat m\ 367;. 
BtOOMFiELD,, AJPh. xvni, 352. — JAOS. XL 379 tl.; J'Iillebrandt, 1 , c. p. 36 
(AJPh. ibid.}. — u JAOS. ibid. 376 ff.; IIilekbraxdt, I c. Colebrooke, 

Essays ID, 319,0*. — The latter class is 'represented' probably by Pari^i.sta-texts 
like the Asurl-kalpa, or the Lhtirta-kalpa (SkaudaySga). — ^4 See above, p. 10. 

^5 Occasionally the name Saunaklya-stitra may be expected to turn up: cp. JAOS. 
ibid. p. 377» tote 3. — JAOS., ibid. p. 37S; ICaus. Introd, p, xix. Summaries 
of both texts are given by Sayana, Introduction, p. 27 ff, ; Weber, Nak.^atra li, 
p. 392 ff. The Naks. is occasionally referred to by its initial words rohinl^ 



I. The Atharva-Veda in General. — F. A.-V. in Hindu Literature. 21 


Weber, Verz. II, p. 89, 1 . 7. — 17 JAOS. XIV, p. clviE ; cp. Weber, Verz. I, 
p. 89 ff.; II, p, 87 ff. — xS AJPh. VII, p. 4^511. — X9 JAOS. XV, p. vff. — 20 See 
Index B, p. 383 ff. — Baltimore Dissertation: AJPh. X. 165 — 197. — 22 Ahnen- 
kult, p. 95, 240 ff. This SrSddhakalpa belongs* to the school of Saunaka. ^ Out of 
Hemadrx’s CaturvargacintSmani Caland, ibid. p. 243 ff., has reconstructed a SrSddha* 
kalpa belonging to the Paippalada-school ; he also presents fragments from the 
same source of /nf^f^a^^z-ceremonies according to the smrti of Paithinasi (p. 109 ff.); 
cp. the next paragraph. — 23 Weber, IS. IV. 43 iff. ~ 24 JAOS. XV, p. XLViii ff 
Cp. also the curious nighaniU'^'^^ passage, TB. 3. 10. i. — 25 WL.2, p, 170 (cp. 
IS. Ill, 247 ff.); Weber, Verz. L 92; II. 88. — 26 is. X. 3i7ff. — 27 Omina und 
Portenta, p. 320 ff. — 28 JAOS. XV. 207 ff. — 29 For a list of such texts see JAOS. 
XI, p. CLXXI, and cp. Aufrecht’S Catalogus Catalogorum. The Atharvatarpanam 
is, of course, likely to be the same as Ath. Pari^. 43. — 3o Weber, Verz. I, p. 332. 

— 3 x JAOS. XL 376; KauA Introd. p. xxuff. — 32 GGA,, 1891, nr. 8, p. 283. — * 
33 Ahnenkult, p. 99, 109 ff. — 34 Recht und Sitte, p. 12 ff. — 35 Ritual-Litteratur, 
p. 36. — 36 Caland, ibid. 95, 107 ff. — 37 Kaul Introd. p. xviiff. — 38 MHASL., 
p. 328 ff; Max Muller, ZDMG. XIX. X37ff; Weber, IS. I. 247 ff-, sSoff.; IL iff., 
i7off.; III. 324ff.; IX. Iff.; IStr. IL 135; III. 585!!.; WL.2 xyoff (especially p.i 71, 
note 3); Deussen, Sechzig Upanishad’s, p. 53iff. — 39 WL.2, p. 172 ff. — 40 Weber, 
Verz. IL 88; Hatfield, JAOS. XIV, p, clx. — 4 ^ Deussen, ibid. p. 575, 583 ff. — 
42 Ibid. p. 532 ff.; Weber, Verz. L 95. — 43 WL.2, p. 174 note 3. — 44 Deussen, 
ibid. — 45 IS. 251; WL.2, p. 173; Deussen,' p. 543. — 46 See below, S 59 * — 
47 E. g. AV, 3, 20. I : Jabala 4; AV. 4. i. I: Atharva^iras i ; AV. 4. 4. i: SamnySsa I ; 
AV. 6. 96. I: Pratiagnihotra 1; AV. lo. 2. 26 — 27; Atharva^iras 6 ; AV. lo. 8. 27: 
Atharva^iras l; AV. II. 4 to be compared with Pra§na 2. 7ff. ; AV. il. 4. 13: 
Mupdaka 2. i. 7; AV. il. 8: Samnyasa 3, and Kanthasruti 5; AV. iS: Samnyasa i. 

— 48 Cp. below, S 24. — 49 Deussen, ibid. p. 531. •— 5 ° Kausika, Introduction, 
p. xxxiii. — 5 x See below, S 68 . — 52 IS. IX. 49 ff*; Sechzig Upanishad’s, p. 858 ff. 
The Pra]9avopanisad is catalogued by Burnell, Sk. MSS. in the palace of Tanjore, 
33b j Stein, Catalogue of Sanskrit Manuscripts at Jammu, p. 31; Catalogue of 
the Oriental Manuscript Library in Madras, p. 52; cp. also Taylor, Catalogue of 
Oriental MSS. in Fort St George, II, 472. — 53 See below, % 69. — 54 Deussen, 
p. 867ff - 55 JAOS. VII. 333—615; X. 156-171; cp. IS. IV. 79 ff; V. 45 iff*; 
IStr. IL 230 ff.; WL.2, p, i6g, __ 56 SPAW. 1S71, p. 77. — 57 Bhandarkar, Report 
1883—4, p. 30. — 58 Bloomfield, JAOS. XV, p. XLvmff. — 59 Weber, Verz. II. 
79 ff.; and in the introductions of his translations of AV., books 3 — 5, IS. XVII. 
I77ff.; XVIIL iff.; Shankar Pandit in 'his edition of theAV. voL I, Critical note, 
p. lyff. — 80 See the passages extracted by Shankar Pandit, ibid. p. 18--23;. cp. 
JAOS. XI. 376. — bt Weber, Verz. IL 89. — <^2 Shankar Pandit, ibid, p- 15 (top.). 


F. THE POSITION OF THE ATHARVA-VEDA IN HINDU 
LITERATURE IN GENERAL.^ 

§ 20. General estimate of the AV, — The Atharvan is a sacred text 
in more than one respect: aside from the materials which it shares with the 
other Vedas the majority of its hymns are benevolent or highly religious 
(theosophic) ; these cannot at any time have been received with any other 
sentiment than esteem. Even the sorceries of the AV. necessarily show a 
double face: they are useful to oneself, harmful to others. Thus there arises 
a conflict of emotions which lasts throughout the history of recorded 
Hindu thought and is summed up in the final orthodox and stereotyped view 
that the Atharvan is used ‘to appease, to bless, and to curse’ ^ In the long 
run there arose withal a strong wave of popular aversion against the Veda 
whose most pointed teaching is after all sorcery. This appears from the 
discussions of the Hindus themselves as to the orthodoxy of that Veda*^; 
from the conscious efforts of the later Atharvan writings to vindicate its 
character and value; from the allegorical representation of the Atharvan as 
‘a lean black man, sharp, irascible, and amorous'' and from occasional 
statements of the Vedic and Classical texts. 

,S 21. The Atharvan in the RV. — The RV. has no speciflc designa- 



22 


IL Literature and History. i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Br ahmana. 


tion for Atharvan cliarms, although it contains a good!}- number of such 
charms. No great importance is to be attached to this silence; the praises 
to the gods in connection with the great soma-sacrifices offer but scant occa- 
sion for the mention of sorcery, or the plainer practices of every-day life. 
Yet sorcery and house-practices there were in India at all times s. The failure 
of the RV. to mention such charms by a collective name like atharvitniirasalt 
must be gauged by the slenderness of its opportunities to mention the Veda 
as a generic name (cp. 8. 19. 5}, or Vedic collections or redactions in par- 
ticular (10. 90. 9) A There is no proof that even the oldest ‘Rigvedic period’, 
or the most ancient Hindu tiradition accessible historically, excluded writings 
which would be entitled to the name of Atharvan-charms by their subject- 
matter, form (metre), or style: even the absence of generic names, such as 
bkesajdniy atharvdnah^ angirasaJi^ for such compositions may Be due to acci- 
dental silence. The existing redactions of the AY., to be sure, betray them- 
selves as later than the RV. redaction in many ways, especially by the 
character of the variants in those mantras which they share with the RY.^; 
certainly also a good many of existing Atharvan hymns are later than the 
bulk of the RV. Nevertheless, we cannot escape the conclusion that hymns 
of the Atharvanic type were composed simultaneously with, or even prior to 
those of the Rigvedic (srauta) type^. 

S 22. The Atharvan in the AY. itself. — The AV, alludes to its 
own class of compositions but rarely: 10. 7. 20 {atkarvdngirasali); ii. 6. 14 

{b/iesajd)i cp. also 19. 54. 5, and 19. 22. i; 23.1^. There is to be noted 

also a decided advance in the association of the names Atharvan, Afigiras 
and Bhrgu with the practices and the conditions which tliese hymns are aimed 
at: e. g. 4. 37. i where the Atharvans appear as slayers of the Rak§as; see 
also 4. 3. 7; 5. 19. I ; 10. 6. 20. Especially noteworthy is the evident asso- 
ciation of the word dfigirasawnih sorcery and spells, and the somewhat less 
clear corresponding correlation of dtharvam with auspicious charms (see 
above, p. 8). Otherwise the attitude of the AY. is much the same as 

that of the Yajus-texts: the three Vedas are often mentioned without the fourth 

byway of esoteric restriction to the sphere of the great Vedic (srauta) ritual. 
Thus it augurs no contempt or neglect of the Atharvan, if in a charm con- 
structed for the pui*pose of obtaining a knowledge of the Vedas (7. 54: Kaus. 
42. 9), only sdman^ yajulj, veda, and oblation (/mvi/i) are mentioned: the 
person who here desires Vedic learning is not in training for Atharvan priest- 
hood, and therefore does not take care to include this special branch of 
learning. A similar passage in a RV. vSutra (AG.3.3.1— 3) does not hesitate 
to include the AV. on the same occasion. Even the GB. which certainly 
cannot be accused of Atharvaphoby (see § 66) is caught napping once or 
twice, and omits the AV. from systematic statements of Vedic compositions: 
I. I. 23 and 24. In fact this very omission shows that the AV. SaiphitS, 
unlike its ritualistic adjuncts (see $ 30), is in no wise engaged either % self- 
glorification, or in polemics against the other Vedas: the Atharvan poets 
certainly are quite unconscious of any disadvantages inherent in their text, or 
of any contemptuous view of the AV. on the part of the adherents of the 
/Other Vedas, 

I 23. The Atharvan in the Srauta-texts. — The position of the AV. 
in the /mf//i3s-literature in general depends altogether on the practical char- 
acter of these texts as exponents of the great Vedic sacrifices: these, by their 
very nature, exclude direct interest in the systematic charms of the himajdni 
and db/iicdrikdnL Such sorcery as is interwoven with the //'<2z//cr-performances 
obtains independent expression in metrical stanzas and prose formulas ijajus) 


L The Atharva-Veda in General. — F. A.-V. in Hindu Literature. 23 


which are thoroughly Atharvanic But in the sruti the sphere of the Atharvan 
is restricted to matters that are incidental and subsidiary, intended merely to 
pave the way for the main issue, the successful dispatch of the sacrifice to 
the gods, and the undisturbed gratification of the priests {isii and ^urti). Under 
these circumstances pronounced hostility against the AV., such as crops out 
at a later and more reflective age, would be a paradox, too silly even for 
the Yajus-texts and the Brahmajias. Rigid consistency is, of course, not to 
be expected; witchcraft blows hot and cold from the same mouth: according 
as it is turned towards the inimical forces, human and demoniac, or is turned 
by others against oneself, it is regarded as useful or noxious. The AV, takes 
the same view by implication, as may be gathered from a comparison of 2.12 
with 7. 70, or 2. 7 with 6. 13 and 37. It is a question throughout of my 
sorcery or thy sorcery. The poet of RY. 7. 104. 15, 16 exclaims ^May I die 
to-day if I am a • sorcerer’, and makes complaint against his enemy who calls 
him, though he is pure, a sorcerer, and against the real sorcerer who pretends 
that he is pure. Though ydtu here, as at AV. i. 7 and 8, is regarded as 
devilish, the writer of SB. 10. 5. 2. 20 is not prevented from placing the 
ydtuvidali, Hhose that are skilled in sorcery’, in solemn array with the repre- 
sentatives of the holiest forms of literature, the bahvrcali etc. On the other 
hand even bhesajam ‘cure, medicine’, the altruistic province of the Atharvan, 
though well regarded in general, does not come off without a sneer 'L we 
may trust that the canons of social standing and literary appreciation of a 
people that produced the better types of Vedic literature could not fail, in 
the proper mood, to estimate at its right value the wretched hocus-pocus of 
the hJiesajdni, though these were the best that the Vedic period had produced 
for the’ relief of bodily ailment. Yet the Veda without charms and sorcery 
would not be the Veda, and the srauia-ttyX^ are not in the position to throw 
stones at the Atharvan. Anyhow a sober survey of the position of the AV, 
in the sruti sliows that this Veda, while not within the proper sphere of the 
greater concerns of Vedic religion, is considered within its own sphere as^a 
Veda in perfectly good standing; the question of its relative importance, its 
authority, and its canonicity is not discussed, nor even suggested. 

Accordingly the mythic personages Atharvan, Ahgiras, and Bhrgu, and their 
descendants (Atharvapa etc.), whose proper names in the course of time are 
restricted more and more to the sphere of the Atharvan, continue in the 
sruti to be designations of demigods and Rishis’^. These names are held 
in honor no more and no less than other eponyms, it being reserved for the 
later Atharvan waitings to extol them beyond measure, and to claim for theni 
a special position as typical Vedic saints. And this is true although the sruti 
occasionally feels the connection betw^een these names and the sphere of the 
Atharvan, as when KS. 16. 13 mentions a Rishi Bhisaj Atharvapa, the RB. 
30. 6 a Rishi Ghora Ahgirasa^^* or w^hen PB. 12. 8. 6 states that Dadhyanc 
Ahgirasa was the chaplain {purodMmyd) of the gods. Even more clearly 
does this appear from the w^ay in wdiich the hymns of the AV. are alluded 
to in the sruti. Ordinarily the texts are preoccupied with the sacrificial lite- 
rature in the narrower sense, and hence devote themselves to the mention 
and laudation of the trctyl vidyd. On the other hand, \vhenever the srautG’- 
texts mention, or draw” upon other literary forms like ztihdsu^ purdna^ git/id, 
sUtra, upamsad{ and many others, the Atharvan is regularly included, and 
that too, almost invariably in the following order: the three \edas. occupy 
the first three places; the AV. holds the fourth place, and next follow in 
variable arrangement the types itihdsa etc. Typical examples are; TS. 
7. 5. II. 2 = KS., Asvaraedhagrantha, 5. 2 {angiras alone); SB. 10. 5. 2, 10; 




24 


IL Literature and History, ib. Atharva- Veda and Gopatha-Brahman\-\. 


II. 5. 6. 4—8; ^13. 4 - 3 - 3 ^-; TB. 3. 12. S. 2; TA. 2. 9. 2; 10. 7. 8; ii. 2; 
AS. 10. 7. I If.; SS. 16. 2. 2 If 

g 24. The Atharvan in the Upani.sads. — The position of the AV. 
in the XJpanisads is much the same as in the sruti in general. Aside from 
the Atharvan XJpanisads, which refer more freely to the AV., it is introduced 
but rarely, and in the same way as in the Srauta-texts, i. e., preceded by the 
trayl^ and followed by a variable list of other types of composition: e. g. 
BrhlJ. 2. 4. 10; 4. 1. 2; 5. 1 1; ChU. 3. i — 4; 7. i. 2, 4; 2. i; 7. i ; MU. 6. 32 and 
33. Very much more numerous are the cases in which the irayt alone 
occurs^"*, showing that the draughts upon the AV. and the subsequent literary 
compositions are, in general, made under the excitement of formulaic solemnity. 
Needless to say, the Upanisads with their eye aloft alike from hymn, sacri' 
ficial formula, and witchcraft-charm, have no occasion to condemn the AV., 
aside from that superior attitude of theirs which implies and diplomatically 
expresses condemnation of the entire Veda that is not brahmavidyd. Even 
the Atharvan Upanisads do not in general sound either the polemic or the 
apologetic note of the ritualistic writings of the A\f The late Franava (Pranou) 
assumes the superiority of the AV.^s^ but the Pranava is a part ot the Gopatha- 
Brahmana (g 68). Besides' this there is only an interpolated passage in the 
Prasna that tries to secure at any cost the correlation of the Atharvan with 
the highest brahma'^^. The authority of Atharvan teachers, Sanatkumara, 
Ahgiras, Paippalada, etc. is, of course, invoked, by way of imparting to those, 
texts an esoteric school-character. But in general, ail that may be said is, 
that these tracts mention the fourth Veda along with the other three more 
frequently than the Upanisads of other schools, that the AV. is quietly added 
to the tray% whether other literary forms like the itihdsapurdnain^ etc., appear 
in the sequel or not. Thus the four Vedas alone: Nrsimhapurvatapani i. 2 
and 4; 2, i; Atharvasiras 1; Muktika 12 — 14; Maha 3; the four Vedas with, 
other literary categories: Muijdaka i. i. 5; Nrsimhapurvatapani 5. 9. Even 
these Upanisads, however, occasionally lapse into the more frequent habit of 
the bulk of the Vedic literature, and fail to refer to the AV., whether con- 
sciously or unconsciously, it seems impossible to say: Mundaka 2. i. 6; Prasna 
2. 6; Nrsuhhatapam 5. 2; Bralimavidya 5!! As a class the Atharvan Upani- 
$ads are engaged neither in defending the AV. from attack, nor in securing 
for it any special degree of prominence. 

S 25. The Atharvan in the Grhya-sutras. — In the Grhyasutras one 
would expect a greater degree of intimacy with the Atharvan, and hence a 
more frequent and less formulaic reference to its writings, since in more than 
one sense the Grhyasutras are themselves Atharvanic. Many of their mantras 
are identical with, or variants of those contained in the AV. But even the 
Grhya-rites, popular, nay vulgar, as they must have been in their imtrammeled 
beginnings were, so to speak, Rishihed, and in time passed through a process 
of school-treatment which enstranged them from the Atharvan, and assimilated 
them, as far as possible, to the RV., SV., and YV., as the case may be. 
Thus the battle-cliarm AG. 3. 12, instead of drawing upon the very abundant 
mantes of tliis kind in the AVAq is decked out with the scattering material 
of this class in the RV. Nowhere is there a marked degree of litexary rela- 
tionship with the AV. Sometimes the Atharvan is mentioned in the manner 
which is normal in the /rud; L e., preceded by ^the /rayl^ and followed by 
other varieties of composition: AG. 3. 3. i — 3; SG. i. 24. 8; HG. 2. 19. 16. 
But in SG. I. 16. 3 (bra/mam/a); PG, 2, 10. 7 (atkarvaveda); 2. 10. 21 
{atharvamwi)-^ HG. 2. 3. 9; 18.3; 20.9 {ailmrvaveda) there is a distinct 
advance along the line of later development in the more distinct and familiar 



L The Atharva-Veda in General. — F. A.-V. in Hindu Literature. 2 5 


mention of the fourth Veda; this is not balanced altogether by the cases of 
restriction to the trayi (SG. i. 22. 15; 24. 2; HG. i. 5, 13; 2. 13. i), or 

to two Vedas (AG. i, j, 6 = SG. i. 13. 4 ^ PG. i. 6. 3; GG. i. 6. 19; 3. 2. 48), 
because these passages are to a considerable extent quotations, or modified 
mantras from the The true value of this testimony is chronological, not 

sentimental: the Grhyasutras, as much as their subject-matter is akin to the 
AV., are not imbued with a sense of its especial value and importance, any 
more than the srazz^a-Xexts. They handle their materials in a self-centred 
fashion; their reference to the AV. is formulaic in every single instance; and 
the greater frequency with Which it is mentioned marks the later chronology 
of the composition of the Grhyasutras into formal treatises This is illustrated 
significantly by the list of Rishis at the iarpana in the Grhyasutras of the RV.^*^: 
here Sumantu whom very late tradition designates as the source of Atharvan- 
lore^°, ^but vyho figures not at all in Atharvan texts, is given a prominent 
place. From such a late period of Atbarvanic development do the Grhya- 
sutras derive their consciousness of the AV. 

S 26. The Atharvan in the law-literature (dharma). — There is 
yet another field of literature whose roots also reach down to the Veda, 
namely that of the law-books {dharma) \ in the legal Sutras, Sastras, and 
Smrtis, especially in their so-called vyavaIidra-(dci 2 :^X.tx% judgment must ‘be 
finally passed on the unclean and sinister phases of Atharvanic activity. 
Here the golden rule must come up for consideration. The need of doing 
unto others what one would have others do unto oneself, and leaving the 
opposite undone, is sure to be felt and expressed. In the d/iarma-itxt'^ also 
the AV. retains in a measure its place by virtue of its profound hold upon 
popular beliefs, because indispensable sciences like medicine and'astrology are 
Atharvanic by distinction, and because the Atharvan priest performs, especially 
for the king, inestimable services in the injury and overthrow of enemies. ‘ The 
king^s chaplain ( ptirokita) was in all probability as a rule an Atharvan priest 
(cp. Yajhav. i. 312). But incantations, sorceries, love-charms and the like do 
work injury, and the d/iarma^itxts pronounce with no uncertain voice the 
judgment that the Atharvan, useful or indispensable as it is under certain cir- 
cumstances, is on the whole inferior in chai’acter and position, that its practices 
are impure, and must be either strictly regulated, or prohibited, by the proper 
punishments. 

The AV. is not mentioned by name very frequently in the Dharma-texts 
A. number of times it presents itself in the normal and formal Vedic manner, 
i. e. preceded by the traividya^ and followed by other literary types, especially 
the iH/iasapurdnam^ e. g. ViDh. 30.37; BDh.2.5. 9. 14; Yajnav. 1.44; Ausanasa 
3. 44; Karmapradipa 2. 5. 10. A little less frequently it holds the position of 
the fourth Veda in cases where no subsidiary literature is mentioned: BDh. 
3. 9. 4; 4. 5.^1; VaDh. 22, 9; Ausanasa 3. 86; Vrddha-Harlta 3. 45. The 
Atharvasiras (Siras), an Upani§ad connected with the AV., is often mentioned, 
with respect of course, e. g. GDh. 19. 12; VaDh. 22. 9; BDh. 4. i. 28; ViDh. 
55. 9; Ausanasa 4. 5. More pointedly the sacred texts of the AV. me re-^ 
commended as the true weapons with which the Brahmana may slay his ene-. 
mies, Manu ii. 33 {srutir atharvaiigh'asih)^ the king must choose as his Puro- 
hita one skilled in the Atharvan and Ahgiras Yajnav. i-.3i2; 

the same behest is implied GDh. ii. 15, 17, where, the king is enjoined to 
take heed of that which astrologers and interpreters of omens tell him, and 
to cause the Purohita to perform in his house-fire expiatory rites rites 

for prosperity (mahgala), and witchcraft-practices against enemies (aMkdra)^\ 
Such a Purohita is ca ipsa an Atharvan priest At BDh, 2. 8. 15. 4; ViDh. 



26 II. Literature and History, ib. Atharva-Yeda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


73.11; 81.4 the demons called yatudhana are driven out by means of 
sesame, in perfect accord with AY. i. 7. 2. In the Atri-Samhita (JTvananda’s 
collection, voL i, p. 45) Atharvan priests skilled in astrology are recommended 
for the performance of kaddhas and sacrifices. Cp. also ViDh. 3.75; 71. 66; 
Manu 7. 217; Yajiiav. i. 332, 

Thus far the dkarma-ttyits express regard for the AY. and conscious 
dependence upon its literature and its practices. But the dubious quality of 
the fourth Veda sounds from notes pitched in a different key. In the first 
place the omission of the AY. from Vedic lists which characterizes the srauia- 
texts, is conuiiiied in the d/mrma-tQx% here as there without pronounced 
disapproval. Thus notably in the prohibition of the other Vedas while the 
sound of the Samans is heard, only RY. and YY. are mentioned: GDh. 16. 21 ; 
VaDh. 13. 30; ViDh. 30. 26; Manu 4, 123, 124. Other cases in which the 
traividya is mentioned without reference to the AY. are BDh. 2. 8. 14. 4, 5 ; 
4. 5. 29; Manu I. 23; 3. 145; II. 263 — 6; 12. 112; Yajhav. 2. 211. The in- 
feriority of the AY. is stated outright at^ApDh. 2. ii. 29. 10, ii, where it is 
said that the knowledge of women and Sudras fonns a supplement to the 
AV.^b* more brusquely ViDh. 5. 191 counts him that recites a deadly in- 
cantation from the AY. as one of the seven kinds of assassins. More fre- 
quently performances which imply the use of the AY. are decried and punished, 
though the Yeda is not mentioned by name. Magic rites with intent to harm 
enemies, and curses in general cause defilement: they are visited with severe 
penances, e. g. ApDh. i. 9, 26. 7; BDh. 2. i. 2. 16; GDh. 25, 7; ViDh. 37. 26; 
Manu 9, 290; Yajiiav. 3. 289 (contrariwise Manu ii. 33). The practice ot 
medicine is emphatically described as impure here as in the Brahmauas^b 
e. g. ApDh. I. 6. 1 8. 20; YiDh. 51, 10; GDh. 17. 17; VaDh. 14. 2, 19; Manu 
3. 152; Yajnav. i. 162: the charge, of course, reflects upon the AY. Astrology 
and fortune-telling ai*e impure professions, e, g. BDh. 2. i. 2. 16; ViDh. 82. 7; 
VaDh. 10. 21; Manu 3. 162: that these occupations were Atharvanic seems to 
follow from AY. 6. 128; Kaus. 50. 15 (cp'. Atri-samhita, above). An especially 
pointed reflection against the AY. is implied in the prohibition of 'mfdakriyd 
or mzdakar?nan^ ‘practises with roots', YiDh. 25. 7; Manu 9. 290; ii. 64: the 
brunt of this charge is without doubt directed against the AY, (see, e. g. 
I. 34; 6. 138), though practices of this kind are not wanting outside of that 
Veda (cp. RV. 10. 145, and the Grhyasutras). Finally, GDh. 15. 16; ViDh. 
82. 12; Manu 3. 151; 4. 205, he that sacrifices for the common herd (grama- 
ydjaka) \% impure: we may presume that this kind of activity was largely, if 
not entirely in the hands of Atharvan priests; cp. SBE. XLII, p. xl, note. 

§ 27. The Atharvan in the Mahabharata. — The position of the 
AY. in the Mahabharata is characterized by the single statement that its 
importance as a Veda, and its canonicity, are finally and completely estab- 
lished; that its practices are familiarly known and, in general, not subjected 
to any particular criticism. The great collection deals so largely with the 
interests of the K§atriyas ,as to preclude any conscious discrimination against 
the AY., since thisYeda^ also is largely engaged in the interest, of the ’kings 
{rdjakarniamYK Frequently, to be sure, the prevailing Yedic habit of speaking 
of ,the threefold Yeda is continued mechanically l>tit the ' high regard for 
the, Atharvan and its , unchallenged position in the oanon are ' proved . by' the 
quasi-cosmogonic passages Tn which the four Vedas figure' in" close affiiiitv 
with the', personified creator. iThus, at 5. 10$. 3770. .Brahman is said 

to ; have first sung the four Vedas, and at 3. 203. 15 ==^'13560 Brahman, has 
the epithet Caturveda; and similarly much else of this sort^b By itself the 
AY. is mentioned trequently either with direct praise, or in a position of 



L The Atharva-Veda in General. — R A.-V. in Hindu Literature. 2 7 


indisputable usefulness. E. g. at 2. 1 1. 19 = 437 the atharvangirasah perso- 
nified, are mentioned honorifically along with other Vedic Rishis; at 5. iS. 5 
= 548 ff. Ahgiras praises Indra with mantras of the AV., hence Indra declares 
that this Veda shall thenceforth have the name atharvmgirasa. At 12. 342. 
99 1325811. Prajapati declares that Atharvaii sages fashioned him into 

an Atharvan priest devoted to the practice of the five kalpas {pancakalj>am 
atha)'vanajii)\ at 3.305.20=17066 Kunti knows Atharvan. mantras {atharvd- 
■ngirasi^^ srutam) which compel the gods to appear; and so on®^b^.- It is, of 
course, not to be expected that the Atharvan and its practices, notwithstanding 
their establishment in the good graces of the Epic, writers, shall come off 
entirely without criticism; there must have been persons aching under its 
supposed inflictions, and moods alive to a full sense of its vulgarity. In such 
cases the Epic reflects entirely the spirit of the d/iarma-tQxts. Thus physicians 
are declared^ to be impure, 12. 36. 28 = 1322; 13. 90. 13 = 4282; or, 

practices of bad women with charms and roots are condemned, 3. 39. 6 = 
2237 ff. Magic or sorcery is in general regarded as good, but yet it L possible 
in the view of the Epic to bewitch right so as to make it wrong, to be iTdharmd- 
bhicdrin {12. 140. 42 = 5288), or to use foul indyd (7. 30. 15 = 1316 ff.): 
the *ltharvan duplicity is ineradicable. 

§28. The Atharvan in Sanskrit, Jain a, and Bauddha literature. — 
In Sanskrit literature in general the AV., though not mentioned very frequently, 
is just as firmly established as in the Mahabharata. The Ramayaua refers to 
the AV. but once (2. 26. 21); but the Dasakumaracarita (twice, chap. 2, p. 94, 
and chap. 3, p. 108), the Kiratarjumya 10. 10, and the proverbs here and 
there, exhibit it in undiminished usefulness and respect. Susruta’s Ayurveda 
is naturally acquainted with the oldest source of Hindu medicine: i. 89. 19; 
122. 10. The Furauas always speak of the fourfold Veda, and present the 
AV. in the exalted position given it in its own ritualistic literature (see the 
next chapter): paurohityam sdntipai^stikdni 7 'ajMm athm'vavedena Mrayed 
hrahmaivain ca (Visnu-Puraiia, Prasthanabheda, p. 16, 1. 10). The Matsya, as 
quoted by Sayana in the introduction to the AV., p. 6, orders that the Puro- 
hita shall compass the mantras and the Brahmana of the AV.; and the Mar- 
kandeya claims that the king consecrated with its mantras enjoys the earth 
and the ocean (Sayana, ibid.) On the other hand the Jainist and Buddliist 
literatures naturally cap their small esteem of the Veda in general with occa- 
sional express condemnation of the practices of the AV. Thus the Sutra- 
krtanga-sutra 2. 27 forbids the incantations of the Atharvan \dtharvam)i 
or the Atthakavagga 14. 13 of the Sutta-nipata forbids the practice of the 
AtliabbaiTia-Veda, To the condemnation of practicesi^ essentially Atharvanic is 
devoted the Maha Siiam in the second chapter of the Tevijja-sutta; similarly 
the Vinaya, Kuilavagga 5. 32, 2 3^ 

S 29. The Atharvan in grammatical, lexical, and text-historical 
works. — In grammatical, lexical, and text-historical treatises the Atharvan 
still occupies a somewhat uncertain position. Panini 4. 3. 133; 6. 4. 174 has 
dtharvanika (cp. the gana to 4. 2. 63), without defining its position 3“ ; the 
Mahabha^ya not only mentions its Samhita (Saunaklya or Paippalada) by the 
term vimsino ^ i)girasaJf^\ but is peculiar in placing it, or rather its opening 
stanza, sani m dm, at the head of the list of Vedic writings 34 : the scholiast 
explains this unusual position of the AV, on the ground that all sacrifices 
begin with the expulsion of demons (ra^ms and pisdca) from the sacrificial 
ground. Weber prefers to think that the Vedas of irauta (praividyd) 
had at that time become obsolete and were only mentioned for form’s sake. 
Perhaps the growing importance of the office of the Brahman, the fourth 



28 11. Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha -Brahman a. 


type of priest, at the Vedic sacrifice, and the growingly frequent tenure of 
this office by Atharvan priests, accounts for the unusual attitude of Patanjali^-l 
Or we may bear in mind the special practical importance of this Atharvan 
stanza as a purificatory prayer in the morning, manifested by the fact that it 
is placed at the head of many Saunaklya-MSS. where it does not originally 
belong 3 ^. The Atharvanika are also cited respectfully in the Anupada (3. 12) 
and Nidana Sutras (2. 12) of the SV.37 in connection with teachers of other 
Vedic schools; similarly Sayana to Mahanarayana Up. (IS. 11 . 100, note 2). 
The Caranavyuhas treat the AV. as the fourth Veda, on the same plain as 
the other Vedas 3 ^; the Brhaddevata 5. 15 knows the athaj'vdfigirasdh maiitrah 
in active practice. Of lexical texts the Amarakosa does not mention the A V.; 
in the Medimkosa Atharvan figures as the name of the Veda^‘^ But a writer 
as late as Hemacandra, 249, may still describe the AV. as an extract 
{tiddhrti) from the iraividya^^. 

I This chapter is a revised abstract of the investigation on this subject printed 
by the author, SBE. XLII, p. xxvaii — LVi; the paragraph at the end, 'on the position 
of the AV. in the grammatical and kindred literature, is added to the original 
treatment of the subject. — 2 Madhusudanasarasva.ti (IS. I. 16); Kesava toKaus. 
I. 1; Deva to KS. 15. 7. II, and else^Yhere. — 3 Alberuni, India (Sachau’s trans- 
lation), vol. I, p. 129, reports that the AV. is less in favor with the Hindus than 
the other Vedas. According to Burnell, Vanisabrahmana of the SV., p. xxi, the most 
influential scholars of Southern India still deny the genuineness of the AV. — 

4 Rajendralalamitra, in the introduction to GB"., p. 4. — 5 Cp., e. g. RV. i. 191 ; 
7. 50; 7. 104; 10. 128; and see Aufrecht’s edition of the RV., vol. II, p, 670 ff. 
— ^ See SBE. XLII, p. xxx, note 3.-7 See above, S 3 ; below, ^ 42. — 

5 Knauer, Festgruss an Roth, p. 64 ff., and in opposition to our view, Olpenber( 5 , 

DLZ. March 13, 1897 (p. 366 ff.). On the metrical and linguistic criteria for the 
relative dates of RV, and AV. poetry see below, S SS? 42. — - 9 The word hahma 
which is catalogued with the Hraff, 11. 8, 23; 15, 6. 3 (cp. also 15. 3.7) does not 
refer to the AV., but is the broader and higher term for religion in general; cp, 
RV. 10. 71. n, and see below, S 33. — 10 £. g., dig (pits) that destroy the 
Raksas etc.b TS. i. 3. 2. i ; MS. l. 2. 10; VS. 5. 23; SB. 3. 5. 4. 8. £, g. 

TS. 6 . 4. 9 * 3; MS. 4. 6 . 2; SB. 4. u 5 * 14. — SBE. XITI, p. xxxivff. A. 
^3 Cp. above, p. S. — 14 See Jacob’s Concordance, s. vs. r^vetfa, phnaya, rc; 
yajurvetfa^ yajurmaya^ yajus-, sumaveda, samamaya^ sdman. — ^5 IS. I. 296; IX. 51. — 
^0 SBE. XLII, p. XLir, note 2. — U Ibid, p, nyff. ~ tB OldExNBERG, SBE. XXX, 
p. I and XVII jff. — 19 AG. 3. 4. 4; SG. 4. lo. 3; Ssmbavya-Gfhya, IS. XV. 153. 
Cp. IS. XIV. 441 ; WLjf p. 165. — 20 Roth, AV. in Kaschmir, p. 28. — 21 For 
detailed statements see SBE. XLII, p. XLVi ff. — 22 This is the stereotyped summary 
of the functions of the AV., mmapiistikdbhicdrika^ see p. 8. — 25 Cp. BuHLER, 
SBE. II, p. XXIX. — 24 SBE. XLII, p. xxxixff. — 25 SBE. XLII, p. niff.; Kaus., 
chapters 14 to 17. — 26 See A. Holtzmann, Das MahSbhSrata, vol. IV, p. 5. «— 
27 SBE, XLII, p. LH. — 28 Calcutta ed., aihanmHrasu — 29 Ibid, lul — 3^ Ibid* 
Lxvff. — 31 Ibid. LVI. - 32 IS. V. 77, For Fanini’s acquaintance with the so-called 
hrdya, see below g 53. — 33 Cp* TS. 7. 5. ii. 2 «=* Kathaka Asvamedhagrantha, 
and the superscription of the Ath, Pratisakhya, — 34 IS. XIII, 431 ff.; XIV. 441; 
WI.2, p. 165, note 3. — 35 See next chapter, $ 33- Kaul Introd. p. xxxvn. — 
37 IS. I. 4S> 45 ; XIIL 144, 146; WL.2, p. 90, 165, •— 3 « IS. III. 277 ff. — 39 Pet. 
Lex. s. V. atharvan, 2. — 4 ° 1$. 1 . 297, bottom. 

G. THE ATHARVA-VEDA IN THE VIEW OF ITS RITUALISTIC 

LITERATURE L 

S 30. The attitude of the ritual texts towards the Atharvan 
and its priests* — From the preceding chapter we may gather that the Saiii- 
hita of the AV, and the Atharvan Upani§ads allude with predilection and in 
terms of praise to their own kind of compositions, to the mythical sages who 
are their reputed authors, and to Atharvanic priests. Of any systematic 
attempt to make battle against the ancient, threefold Veda or its adherents 
there is no sign. Similarly the ritual texts of the AV. allude preferably, and 



1. The Atharya-Veda in Generai.. — G. A.-V. in its Ritual Literature. 29 


yet incidentally, to their own Veda, and as occasion oifers, bring to the front 
the priests schooled in it: e. g. Kaus. 63. 3; 139. 6; Vait. i. 5; Ath. Parii 
46. 2, etc. But over and above this the ritual texts raise certain special 
claims regarding the position of the AV. among the Vedas, and they demand 
with obvious polemic intention that certain offices shall be reserved for Atharvan 
priests. The position of these texts may be stated under three heads. First, 
they are not content with the rather vacillating attitude of the non-Atharvanic 
texts which restrict the honorific mention of the fourth Veda to more or less 
well-defined occasions, especially to moods when it appears desirable to call 
into requisition the entire range ofVedic literary compositions in addition to 
the trayl vidya (e. g. iiihdsa^ purana^ etc.). Secondly, the office of the Brahman, 
the fourth priest at the ceremonies, is said by them to belong to an 

Atharvavedin, and. Vait. and GB. in fact exhibit the hhrgvangh'ovid in possession 
of that office. Tliirdly, a similar claim is advanced in respect to the office 
of the Purohita; the king must choose an Atharvan priest conversant with the 
Atharvan writings as his chaplain or house-priest: purohita^ or brahman, 

as he is variously called. The latter claim is supported, as has been shown, 
to some extent by later Brahmanical treatises not derived from Atharvan 
schools^. 

§ 31. Exaltation of the Atharvan, and the office of the Brahman 
in the ritual texts. — As regards the lirst point, the GB. i. i. 4 — 10 de- 
scribes the cosmogonic origin of the universe and the Vedas from the lone 
brahma, Vedic texts in general ignore the AV. in these creative fancies, but 
in the GB. the Atharvan and Ahgiras texts are placed at the head: the other 
Vedic texts 6) as well as the subsidiary compositions {sarpaveda etc., 

1. I. 10) are relegated to the rear. GB. i. 3. 4 lauds the AV. as the most 
important religious manifestation {etad vai bhuyisjham brahnia yad blirgV' 
ahgiras a//)', GB. i. 5. 25 ends with the assertion that the students t\\^ trayl 
reach, to be sure, the highest heaven, but that the Atharvans and Ahgiras go 
even beyond to the great worlds of Brahma {ata uita 7 'e braJunaioka mahantah). 
In fact the leading theme at the heart of the composers of the GB. is to 
carry to the front the AV. and its adherents 'h and only rarely, as if by 
mistake, does this text omit the AV. from its Vedic lists (above, § 22). And 
in the same way Vait, 6. i places the AV. at the head of the four Vedas, 
not to speak of the even more energetic exaltation of the Atharvan in the 
Pariri^tas. As regards, secondly, the Brahman, the overseer of the srauta- 
sacrifices, Vait. i. i; ii. 2 (GB. i. 2. 16) state that he must be conversant 
with the Brahma-Veda, or Atharvahgirasah, in the latter passage in expressed 
contrast with udgatar, Iiotar, and adhvaryu of the tray!. At GB. 1.2.18 (end) 
the Brahman is described with the words, esa ha vai vidvdn sarvavid brabmia 
yad bhrgvafigh' 07 'id, indicating the identification of the AV. with the sarva^ 
vidya which stands above the trayi (below, S 33)i GB. i. 3- i, 2 describes 
vividly the futility of the sacrifice without a Brahman skilled in the b/irgv- 
ahgirasa/i; as a cow, horse, mule, or chariot cannot proceed with less than 
four feet, so the sacrifice must have four feet: the four Vedas and the four 
priests. Cp. especially GB. 2. 2. 13 with its source, TS. 3. 5. 2. i, where the 
GB. demurs at the statement of the TS., tasvidd vdsistho brahma kdryali, the 
GB. being committed emphatically to the bhrgvahgirovid. 

§ 32. The office of the Purohita in the ritual texts. — Even more 
energetic are the demands of the liturgic texts in the matter of the office of 
the purohita {b^^ahmajiyguru): ‘The king who rules the country shall seek a 
wise Brahman {brahmdnam). He verily is wise that is skilled in the bhrgu 
a.nd ahgb^as', for the bhrgu and ahgiras act as a charm ‘against all ominous 



30 n. Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda an d GdPxVtha-Brahmana. 


occurrences, and protect everything’ (Kaul 94. 2 — 4; cp. 126. 2). The equi- 
valence of brahman, pirohita, and guru is guaranteed by comparing Ath. 
Paris. 3. I, kulmam srotriyani bhrgvahgirovidani . . . gurum vrnlydd b/iild^atih; 
and 3.3, tasmad bhfgvahgirovidam , . . kurydt purohitam, Cp. also 2. 2, 
brahma tasmad atharvavit Conversely, ‘'The gods, the Fathers, and the 
twice-born (priests) do not receive the oblation of the king in whose house 
there is no gum skilled in the Atharvan’ (2. 3)^ Kami 17. iqfl*; 140. qff. 
exhibit king and Purohita in active cooperation. The Parisi§tas are not content 
with such strong recommendations of the adherents of their Veda; they would 
have the adherents of the other Vedas, yea even of certain branches {sdkkd) 
of the AV. itself, excluded from the ^The Atharvan keeps off terrible 
occurrences, and acts as a charm against portentous ones ... not the Adhvaryu, 
not the Ciiandoga, and not the Bahvrca ... The Bahvrca destroys the kingdom, 
the Adhvaryu destroys sons, the Chandoga dissipates wealth; hence the guru 
must be an Atharvapa ... A Paippalada as guru increases happiness, sovereignty, 
health, and so does a Saunakin who understands the gods and the mantras ... 
The king whose purodhd is in any way a Jalada or a Mauda is deposed from 
his kingdom within the- year, (Ath. Paris. 2. 2 — 5)^. The last four names are 
alike representatives of Atharvan schools (above, p. 1 1 ff.) : the passage shows 
how eager was the scramble for the office of Purohita. That the Atharvans 
finally succeeded in making heard their clamorous demand for this office (see 
below, § 34), is probably due to their superior, if not e.xclusive, knowledge 
of witchcraft, which was doubtless regarded in the long run as the most 
practical and trenchant instrument for the defence of king and people. 

S 33. Causes leading up to the exaltation of the Atharvan and 
its priests. — In order to estimate these claims of the Atharvanists at their 
correct value the following needs to be considered. In the Vedic religion, or 
perhaps better religious evolution, three literary forms and correspondingly 
three liturgic methods of application of these forms to the sacrifice, were 
evolved at a time prior to the recorded history of Hindu religious thought 
and action. They are the well-known types rcali, sdmdni, and yajimsiy and 
their priestly exponents, hotar, udgdtar, and adhvaryu. These literary forms 
taken individually are mere fragments of religious activity; these priests are 
only individual actors, not qualified each by himself to shoulder the burden 
of the literary knowledge or liturgic technique. The Hindus were at all times 
aware that these religious forms are fragmentary and phases of a whole. The 
RV. contains countless expressions indicating the insufficiency of the rcah to 
fulfill alone the scheme of religious action: the absence of sdmdni would in 
principle leave Vedic religion just as much* mutilated as the absence oirmli ; 
die categories are the three parts of a trio whose melody is carried by each 
in turn. A comprehensive vision was never wanting, tliough the search for 
a word for 'religion’, or religious practice as a whole was at first not very 
successful The Brahmaija-texts^ use sarvavidyd for knowledge of all the. 
V^das, but the most successful attempt at describing the religious literature 
and action as a whole is the word brahma, correspondingly, he that 
knows the religion as a whole is a brahman. Each of these words appears 
occasionally in the fourth place, brahma after the trayl'^ brahman in company 
with the priests of the trayJ, Thus theTS, (7, 3. i. 4) can say: parimitd vd 
rcalj, parimitdni sdmdm, parimitdni yajumsi; athdi ^tasydi ^vCi nd ^sti y ad 
brahma. In a sense the brahma is a fourth Veda, but it is not coordinate 
with the other three: it embraces and comprehends them and much else 
besides; it is the religious expression and religious action as a whole, and the 
learned esoteric understanding of the nature oftlie gods and the mystery of the 



I The Atharva-Veda in General. — G. A.-V. in its Ritual Literature. 31 


sacrifice as a whole (brahma in brahmodya and brah^iavddin). In the Upani- 
sads this brahma ^ frequently contrasted with the -.ordinary Vedas, is extolled 
above all other knowledge, and in a way personified, becoming one of the 
main conceptions which finally precipitate themselves in the pantheistic 
Brahman-Atman. The knowledge of this brainna there constitutes the »brahma- 
vldym. Needless to say this fourth Veda, if we may so call it, in all its aspects 
has primarily no connection with the AV., not even in the Samhita (11.S.23; 
15* 3; 7; 6 - 3 ; cp. AB. I. 22. 15), nor in the Upanisads of that Veda (e. g. 
Nrsimhapurvatapanl 5. 2): the claim that the Atharvan is the Brahma-Veda 
belongs to the Atharvan ritual 7 . 

This broader religious knowledge exists again from earliest times, not 
only in the abstract, but centres in persons who grasped it as a whole, in 
distinction from the technically qualified priests devoted to some specialty. 
What the brahma is to the trayi^ that the brahman is to hatar, udgdtar, and 
adhvaryu. RV. 10. 71. ii depicts the activity of the four priests, the first 
three handling their respective . literary productions (rcaJj, etc.). The fourth 
priest is described in the words, brahma vadaii jdiavidydm'^ has no special 
Veda, certainly there is no allusion to the AV. In RV. 7. 7. 5 the god Agni 
appears chosen as a Brahman at a sacrifice which suggests the later sattra 
(agmr brahma nrsddane vidharta). In the expression, brahma vadati jaiavidyam, 
the 'own wisdom’ is the brahma (neuter), and vadati jatavidyotm foreshadows 
the brahmodya 'the holy, or theological mystery, or riddle’, as well as the 
ritualist refinements which the Srauta-texts introduce so often with the related 
expression, brahmavadino vadanti. In the non-Atharvanic Vedic texts it is 
never suggested that the Atharvan is of all other things the specific equipment 
which shapes the faculties of this all-around Vedic theologian. Oh the con- 
trary the KB. raises the one-sided claim that a RV. scholar is the proper 
Brahman; Apastamba, Yajnaparibhasasutra 19, more liberally, permits the 
Brahman to perform with all tlireef Vedas, yet even he ignores the AV.^ 
Vasi§tha was a celebrated Brahman and Purohita, and these qualifications were 
said for a time (probably by the descendants of Vasi§tha themselves) to be 
hereditary in this family. But the Brahmanas say explicitly that this is an ob- 
solete custom, every one properly equipped may be a Brahman Anyhow 
there is no original connection between Vasistha and the AV.“, and it is not 
going too far to assume that the distinguished abilities demanded by the 
theory of this office were rare enough to admit everyone that had intrinsic- 
ally valid claims upon it. 

Doubtless the Atharvanists, plea that the Brahman must be one of them- 
selves, and that, consequently, the AV. was the Brahma-Veda was suggested 
by an obvious schematic proportion. As the Hotar, etc., is to the RV., etc., 
so the Brahman is to the fourth Veda, and as the AV. is the fourth Veda, 
or rather a fourth Veda, it required no too violent wrench to identify it with 
that' other comprehensive fourth Veda, the knowledge of the brahma. Thus 
the Atharvan became the Brahma-Veda, and GB. i. 2. 18, end, can say: esa 
ha vai vidvCm sarvavid brahma yad bhrgvahgirovid (cp. 1.5. ii, 15, 19, always 
with the idea of the sarvam). The fact that there was no systematic, sharply 
defined place for the Atharvanist in the scheme of the hieratic [srauta) 
religion — witchcraft formulas at the sacrifice being handled as by the 
Adhvaryu — must have been galling in the long run, until this arrangement 
was completed to their own satisfaction. They may have, though we do not 
know that they did, gathered courage for this tour de Joroe from the frequent 
mention in the AV. itself of the word brahma in the sense of charm, prayer, 
e. g. X. 10. I* 14. 44; 23. 4, etc. If this was done it was a proceeding both 



3 2 11. Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahman a. 


arbitrary and superficial: the word has in the AV. the meaning of charm only 
in so far as the hymns of that Veda happen to be charms; the RV. employs 
the term freely to designate its own suktdni (e. g. 5. 85. i; 7. 28. i). One 
misses, too, in the AV. the plural brakmdni as the true Vedic type of de- 
signation for, a special class of compositions, on a level with rcak, sdmdni^ 
yajumsi, atharvdngirasah^ or, atharvdnah (b/iesajdm), and angimsah {abhicdri- 
kdni). The Atharvanists doubtless also remembered that the AV. of all Sam- 
hitas contains the largest collection of theosophic hymns which deal explicitly 
(10. 2), or implicitly (10. 7), with the divine Brahman and the brd/ima'^^; 
hence, to some extent at least, the later association of the superabundant 
Upani^ads with Atharvan schools. In the Upanisads, as we have seen, the 
knowledge of just such theosophic relations is styled brahmavidya, 

§ 34. Connection of the Purohita with the AV., and interrelation 
ofPurohita and Brahman. — To these Atharvanic pretensions there came 
from another quarter a measure of substantiality, probably at a comparatively 
early time, in this instance with the passive support of all Vedic schools. The 
matter concerns the office of the Purohita, the spiritual and temporal aid of 
the king, his chaplain and chancellor. To be sure the non- Atharvanic Samhitas, 
Brahmanas, and Sutras do not mention the AV. in this connection any more than 
in connection with the office of the Brahman at the sraida-sacnhce. Yet it seems 
very unlikely that the knowledge of Atharvan practices should not at all times 
have been considered a very valuable adjunct, if not a conditio sine qua non, 
of the purohiti, Purohitas, whether they are formal adherents of the AV. or 
not, are always engaging in Atharvanic practices, even against one another ^ a 
T he interests of the king and his sovereignty {ksatriya and ksairani) are too 
obviously dependent upon magic rites to admit the likelihood that the pre- 
tensions to this office on the part of him that knew them should have been 

ignored. At all periods the safety of the king, the prosperity of his people, 

his ascendency over hostile neighbors, must have depended upon his Puro- 
hita's skill in magic. The description, AB. 8. 24 — 28, of the Purohita, his 
functions, and his relation to the king, transfers tlie reader to the sphere 
and spirit of the AV!; the same text (8. 25) describes a magic rite, called 
brahfnanaJi parimdra, designed to kill hostile kings, which might be an extract 
from the ritual of the Atharvan In later texts (GDh. ii. 15, 17; Yajfiav. 
I. 312; cp. also Manuii.33), as a matter of fact the rule -is laid down 

formally that the Purohita should be an Atharvavedin. Savana, Introd. to 

AV., p. 5, 6, makes the same claim outright {paurohityam cd ^tharvavidai 
'va Mryafu); he is able to cite in support not only the rather hysterical 
dicta of the Atharvan writings themselves, but also slokas from the Puranas, 
the Nitisastra, etcAS. In the Dasakumaracarita the marriage ceremony, as 
well as magic rites, are in fact performed at the court of a king with Atharvan 
rites, iitkarvanena {dt/iarmnikemi) vid/iind: the statement is the more valuable 
as it is incidentaP^. 

Not quite so welhdefined are the practical realities in fiivor of the claim 
that the Brahman (fourth priest) must be an Atharvavedin, but we may 
assume that the growing affinity between the AV. and tlit /putokiti contri- 
buted at least something to the partial success which doubtless attended that 
claim. It is not necessary for the purpose in hand to establish at all points 
the origiaai relation between the Purohita and the Brahman whose identity is 
baldly assumed in many passages of the earlier Hindu literature ^7. a com- 
plete survey of the character of each, as well as their ■ respective names 
establishes a fojiiori genuine differences in their character. There is, how- 
ever, one striking point of similarity between them, namely this, that they 



I. The Atharva-Veda in General. — G. A.-V. in its Ritual Literature. 33 


have in charge, each in his own way, the general interests of their noble 
employers. On the other hand all priests having other names, at a very 
early period, certainly at a period prior to the Atharvanic assumption, had 
in ordinary practice only subordinate charges, because of the technical char- 
acter of their knowledge and occupation. RV. 10. 71. ii (cp. 7, 7. 5) ex- 
presses clearly the existence of broader theological interests than mere expert- 
ness in the recitation and chanting of hymns, and the mechanical service of 
the sacrifice (/iotar, tidgdtar and adhvaiyii). This is the Brahmanship which 
later forks into two directions, on one side the general knowledge of the 
procedures at the sacrifice (the Brahman as fourth priest), and the theological 
speculations attaching {brahmaT'ddin)', on the other, the higher theosophy 
which ultimately leads to the brahmavidya of the Upanisads. It is natural 
that a divine thus qualified should at a very early time have assumed per- 
manent and confidential relations to his noble rdjanya-trxx^oytx^ in all matters 
that concerned his religious and sacrificial interests. His functions are those 
of a high-priest. It seems unlikely that this Brahman was in all cases, too, 
competent to attend to those more secular and practical needs of the king 
connected with the security of his kingdom, the fealty of his people, and the 
suppression of his enemies. These activities, rdjaka 7 ^mdni^ as the Atharvan 
writings call them"^, must have called for different training and different 
talents — they represent rather the functions of a chancellor and fighting 
chaplain, than those of a high-priest — and there is no reason to believe 
that every Brahman possessed these necessary qualifications in addition to his 
expertness in systematic theology. On the other hand, conversely, there must 
have been Purohitas incapable of assuming intelligent charge of the more 
elaborate Vedic performances {sraiita)^ unless we conceive that in such cases 
the Brahman was a mere figure-head and his office a sinecure. Yet precisely 
here is to be found the measure of truth which we may suspect in the 
Atharvanist claim that the supervising Brahman shall be an adherent of the 
AV, In many cases the tribal king, or rdjd, might have had but one body- 
priest, well capable of attending to the kingdom’s needs in all manner of 
charms and sorcery, and thus filling the paurohitya creditably with the entire 
armament of the Veda of charms and sorcery, himself an Atharvavedin. If 
the king had about him no systematic theologian resplendent in his jdtavidyd^ 
if there was no adept in that ideal fourth Veda, the sarvavidyd that looms 
above the irayi vidyd^ the remoter applicability of the /r^aj;^/^7*practices to 
real life, or confidence in the ability of hotar^ adhvaryu^ etc., to perform 
their duties correctly of themselves, would lead him to entrust the general 
supervision of the /r^iz/^-performances to his ‘trusty Atharvan Purohita. Thus 
the sweeping claim of the Atharvan priests may be founded at least upon a 
narrow margin of fact; later the Atharvan priests are likely to have equipped 
themselves with enough external and mechanical knowledge to perform the 
function- of Brahman with a show of respectability, witness the activity of the 
Brahman in the Vait In very late times the ability of the Athaxvans to 
practise irauta-i\Xt% and the canonicity of the Vait. were recognized by other 
Vedic schools, if the matter-of-fact references to that Sutra on the part of 
the commentators to KS...be regarded as normaP^. However the entire 
question of the relation of the AV. to /r«2<f/<z-practices is a rather obscure 
point in the history of Vedic literature, it being assumed generally that the AV. 
had originally nothing to do with the larger Vedic ritual The assumption 
in this broad form is at any rate too sweeping. The existing Samhitas of 
the AV. contain mantras which could have had no sense and purpose except 
in connection with /r^T2f/<2:-performances. A series of formulas, e. g. like AV. 

Indo- Aryan Research. IL 1 b. 3 



34 n. Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


6. 47 and 48, has no meaning except in connection with the three daily 
savanas*. Vait. 21. 7 exhibits them, properly no doubt, as part of the agni- 
sfoma. Or AV. 6. 114 is evidently an expiatory formula for faults committed 
at the sacrifice This last is the special sphere of the Brahman. The GB., 
more frequently than other Brahmanas, refers to defects in the sacrifice 
{virista^ una^ ydfaydma) which are to be corrected {samdkdna) by mantras 
(i. I. 13 and 22), and there are mss. of the Vait which add six ^rdyas'ciiia* 
chapters to the body of that text=*h Some knowledge of, //-(^j/Z^z-matters, 
though -not very extensive perhaps, the Atharvans must have had at a very 
early time, and thus the germs of the correlation of the Atharvan and Brahman 
may even rest upon some sfender basis of very ancient tradition. 

I Abstract of the essay on this subject, SBE. XLII, p. lvii fif. — 2 Cp, above, 
$ 26, and below, S 34- — 3 See below S and note especially GB. 2. 2. 14* 
where the atharvdngirasah are added every time in liturgical formulas to the rcak^ 
yajunisj, and sdmdnL — 4 Cp. Weber, Omina und Portenta, p. 3460 *,; IS. X,*I3$; 
Sayana, Introd. to the AV., p, 6.-5 Weber, IS. L 296; BlooiMFIELd, TAOS. Xi! 
378, note. — ^ TB. 3. 10. u. 4; TA- 10. 475 cp. ji’B. 14. 6. 7, 18; 9. 4. 17. 

7 SBE. XLIT, p. XLUI. ^ Cp. ibid. p. Liv, note l. — 9 The commentary admits 
that the AV. may be included: NIHASL., p. 470 ; ZDMG. IX, p. XLvu; SBE. 
XXX, p. 321; cp. ibid. XLII, p. Lxv, note 2. — 10 Weber, IS. X. 34, 35, 137. -J 
II SBE. XLII, p. Lv, note i; lxv, note 3. Cp. also Roth, Abhandlung, p. 9* 
Muir, OST. 1,395. — 12 cp. the mantra, GB. 1. 1. 9; Sayana, Introd, to AV., p. 4* 
Vi.snu-Purana 6. 5 (Wilson’s translation, vol V, p. 210). —’13 MHASL., p. 486.— 
14 Cp. AV. 3. 19;' Kau.L 14. 22—23; B.V. 4. 50. 7—9.'— 15 Cp. DEVA .at KS. 15. 
7, n. — . 10 See above, % 28; SBE. XLII, p. Lxvm. — 17 E. g, RV. 4. 50. 7 ff., 
where the Purohita is called Brhaspati, i. e. the divine brahman, p'or the litera- 
ture on the subject see SBE. XLII, p. lxvui, note 3. — 18 See below $ 55. — 
19 Garbe in the preface to the edition of Vait., p. vi. — 20 See the analysis of 
these two classes of hymns, below, S 58 and 60. — 21 See Garbe, ibid. p. v; 
Weber, Verz. II, p. 83; Kans. Introd. p, xxxm. 


PART II. THE REDACTION AND EXTERNAL FORM OF 
THE ATHARVA-VEDA IN THE SCHOOL OF SAUNAKA. 

A. DIVISION AND ARRANGEMENT OF THE HYMNS. 

,S 35- The division of the Saiiiliita into 20 books. — The AV. in 
the Saunakiya-sakha is divided into 20 books, a number which is upheld to 
some extent by tradition. Thus GB. 1. 1. 5 and 8 speaks of 20 mythical sages 
descended from Atharvan and Ahgiras, and Patanjali in the Mahabhasya 
to Paij. 5. 2. 37, cites the example, vimsmo 'ugirasalp. General state- 
ments of this sort cannot, however, be regarded as conclusive for the original 
number of the SaunakTya-books, because AVP. also has 20 books whose 
genuineness is unimpeachable*. Indeed it would seem as though the original 
collection of the Saunakins consisted of a lesser number of books, and that 
it was later swelled by the addition of a number of books sufficient to bring 
it into accord with the traditional number, that is, to assimilate it to AVP., 
or to some other redaction in 20 books. There is no doubt that the 20* 
book is a late addition' compiled for the most part from the RV. for ritualistic 
purposes of an advanced character (see below, § 62). The concluding prayer 
at the end of book 19 (hymn 72) shows in fact that the collection was at 
some time conceived as having come' to a full stop with book 19. But the 
latter book is hardly less doubtfully a secondary appendage, for the following 
reasons; It is exceedingly corrupt; it does not harmonize with the plan of 
arrangement of the hymns in the first 18 books, which, in spite of certain 



IL The A.-V. in the School of Saunaka. — A. Division and Arrangement. 35 


obscurities, or even puerilities, is on the whole a consistent one AVP. contains 
the 72 hymns of book 1 9 (with the exception of about a dozen) scattered throughout 
that collection, making it seem probable that the supplementary book 19 of the 
vulgata is in the main gathered from that very source-^; AV. 19. 7 and 8 are 
repeated in full in Nak§atrakalpa 10 and 26, which would seem to show that at 
the time of the composition of that text these hymns did not belong to the vul- 
gata, as in the contrary case they would have been quoted by their pratikas^; 
AV. 19. 22 and 23, a fanciful catalogue, or table of contents, of the Sainhita, 
are of obvious Parisi^ta-character*^, and certainly do not refer to book 197, 
although they seem to refer continously (19. 23. 23 — 28) to books 13 — 18; 
the Kaus., by quoting only a few mantras of book 19 by pratTka^ and pre- 
senting others in full {sakulapatha)^ seems to assign to it something like an inter- 
mediate position between a collection fully established within the Samhita of 
its school,, and a body of mantras conceived as belonging to another schooP; 
finally both books 19 and 20 are not treated in the Pratisakhya of the AY., 
or included in the analysis of the Samhita as given by the Paiicapatalika^, 
a fact which is perhaps self-explanatory as regards book 20, but which stamps 
book 19 as a stranger at the time of the composition of the Pratisakhya. 
Remarkable but not finally significant is the reference of the Uttamapatala, 
Ath. Paris. 46. 4 — 6, to the constituency of the AV. According to this text 
the Saunakiya ended with book 16, unless it were assumed that reference is 
made in it to another sdMd^^, Inasmuch however as this tract indulges in 
oddities in connection with the remaining Vedic Samhitas, and because its 
account has in view specific ritualistic purposes, it is not necessary to assume 
that books 17 and 18 were added after the composition of this Parisista, or 
are in any sense the product of a later redaction than that of books i — 16. 
Book 18, to be sure, is wanting in AVP.; book 17, however, is for the most 
part included in it^h 

The AV. is divided into kdmfa ‘books’, anuvdka ‘lessons’, and sukta 
‘hymns’. Another continuous division into prapdthaka extends in Roth and 
Whitney’s edition through the first 18 books (38 in all), but does not con- 
tinue through books 19 and 20. In addition to sukta there is also a par- 
allel division of each kdn 4 a in arthasukta ‘hymns divided off according to 
sense’, and parydyasukta, briefer subdivisions into groups of verses, usually 
ten a group. The latter subdivision is to be compared with the Rigvedic 
varga, beside the sukta. Beginning with book 7 Shankar Pandit’s divisions 
in accordance with his authorities differ somewhat from those of the vulgate 
edition In Say ana’s commentary the briefer hymns are combined into 
larger hymns in accordance with the traditional recitation; e. g. in the case 
of book 6 two hymns (trcd) are fused into one The Kaus. is acquainted 
with the terms adhydya (— kdn{j!a), anuvdka, sukta and parydya'^% SB. 13. 
4. 3. 7, 8 mentions the term parvan in connection with the recital of sections 
from the atharvdnah on the one hand and the angirasah on the other; the 
statement is on the face of it exoteric and fanciful, similar to the loose use 
of parvan in RV. 7, 103. 5; PG. 2. 10. 20^5. The entire collection as printed 
in the vulgate numbers 731 hymns, aggregating about 6000 stanzas. 

S 36* Arrangement of the books according to hymns of differ- 
ent length, — Leaving aside book 20 whose arrangement like that of the 
/mz<f/<2-collectiohs of the Vajus- samhita is liturgical, and the supplementary 
book 19 whose arrangement is apparently hap-hazard, and at any rate not 
to be discussed without reference to AVP., the first iS books disclose the 
following redactorial scheme The first seven books consist each of num- 
erous hymns (respectively 35, 36, 31, 40, 31, 142, and 118) of not very 



36 II Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


many stanzas each, iS at the utmost (5. 17). The hymns of each book are 
regulated by a lower limit in the number of their stanzas. First, ascendingly, 
the hymns of books i — 5, each containing about the same number of hymns, 
have respectively at least 4, 5; 6, 7 and 8 stanzas; this ascending scale seems 
to be repeated in a way inside of book 5, the norm of whose first two 
anuvakas (hymns i— 10) seems to be 8 or 9 stanzas followed in the rest of 
the book by hymns consisting at least of ii, and rising as high as 18 
stanzas (hymn 17). After book 5 there is an obvious break in the arrange- 
ment: the number of hymns increases vastly but the scale of stanzas de- 
scends; book 6 contains 142 hymns of at least 3 stanzas each; book 7 con- 
tains 1 1 8 hymns of two, or even as low as one stanza each. The lower limit 
of stanzas in the hymns of each book may therefore be regarded in a cer- 
tain sense as the normal number of stanzas of that book suggesting critical 
operations in connection with those hymns that have more than the normal 
number. In such cases the question arises whether stanzas were not added 
by a later hand. It is also possible to surmise that certain hymns which 
originally fell short of the normal number of a given book were brought up 
to the norm by later additions. Systematic investigations of this sort have 
been carried on by Bergaigne and Oldenberg on the RV. with interesting 
side-glimpses at the AV^^. Thus the normal number of stanzas in the first 
book is 4,. interrupted only by hymns 3 (9 stanzas), 7 (7 stanzas), 11 (6 stanzas);^ 
29 (6 stanzas), and 34 (5 stanzas). Hymn 3 suggests the throwing out 
of the liturgically repeated stanzas 2 — 5, leaving 5 stanzas, but there is no 
reason further to suspect any of the remaining. In hymn 7 the first four 
stanzas are anustubh, interrupted by a tri^tubh (stanza 5); it is therefore 
possible to imagine that the stanzas 5 — 7 Avere added later. Yet these stanzas 
are original, and there is no reason to suspect them on intrinsic grounds. 
In hymn 1 1 of 6 stanzas the last two may be suspected because they repeat 
the pada, am jarayu padyatmi^ as a refrain. Hymn 29 suggests by com- 
parison with RV. 10. 174 a critical manipulation which shall do justice to 
the original diaskeuastic intention of both collections. By cutting out AV. 
29. 4 and 5 we have left 4 stanzas — RV. 10. 174. i — 3 and 5, and if we 
assume that RV. 10. 174. 4== 10. 159. 4 is also secondary we obtain the original 
4 stanzas of the hymn in both RV. andAV'^. Finally AV. 1.34 has 5 stanzas, 
of which the last may possibly be .later, since its second hemistich is for- 
mulaic; then the first 4 stanzas might be looked upon as a debating charm, 
turned into a love charm by the appendage of stanza 5^°. Conversely it 
is no less easy to breed in one’s mind distrust of certain final stanzas of the 
hymns of four stanzas as indeed of the final stanzas of many Vedic hymns 
in general This is so not only because additions are naturally made at the 
end, but also because final stanzas frequently disclose the true point of a 
hymn to which the initial stanzas, themselves of a preparatory, or ornamental 
character, as it were, work their way. E. g. in RV. 7. 103, a prayer to tlie 
frogs for rain, or AV. 4- xb, imprecation against an enemy, or AV. 3. 13, 
a charm to conduct a river into a new channel, the initial stanzas work their 
way to the climax (or rather anti-climax) in the last stanza of each hymn'll 
Therefore there is quite frequently a break in the sense just before the last 
stanza. Thus, unless Ave be Avarned by these considerations, AV. 1. 2 may 
be plausibly regarded as a batfle-charm consisting of the first 3 stanzas, but 
adapted later to a charm against diarrhoea by the added fourth verse”. 
Next AV. I. 5 and 6 contain 4 stanzas each, together ‘ 8 stanzas; the corres- 
ponding hymn, RV. 10. 9, consists of 9 stanzas. Seven Stanzas are common 
to both texts. Now the scheme of the RV. favors 7 stanzas for 10. 9: shall 



n. The A.-V. in the School of Saunaka. — A, Division and Arrangement. 3 7 


we say that RV. 10. 9. 8 and g, as well as AV. i. 6. 4 are later appendages, 
and that the last-mentioned stanza was added in the AV. to bring the hymn 
I. 6 up to the normal number of 4 stanzas? The same question may be 
asked anent AV. i. 17. 4 which looks a bit patchy (pada c=RV. i. 191. 6°), 
and differs in metre from the rest. Certainly according to the ritual stanza 

4 is important, and contains the very point of the practices connected with 
the hymn. Then what is the meaning of the diaskeuastic manoeuvre in AV. 

I. 20 and 21? The two hymns are patchwork: stanza 20. i = TB. 3, .7. 5. 12 
(ApS. 2. 20. 6); stanza 20. 2 occurs with variants AS. 5. 3. 22; the next, stanza 
20. 3, seems original. From that point on the two hymns (20. 4- — 21. 4) are 
the same as RV. 10, 152, in 5 stanzas. Shall we say that a single hymn of 

5 stanzas was inflated by the Atharvanist into two hymns of 4 stanzas each, 
in order to fit it to the external scheme of his arrangement? This would 
accord in principle with the previous critical acts. Once again, 5 stanzas of 
the two hymns 1.23 and 24, dealing with the same subject (leprosy), are repeated 
TB. 2. 4. 4. I — 2. Has the AV. taken once more a hymn of 5- stanzas, and 
swelled it out to two of 4 stanzas each, in order to pamper its scheme? 
The danger and difficulty of such operations may be seen best in hymn I.4**'’ 
RV. 1. 23. 16 — 19. According to Oldenberg, 1 . c., p. 225, RV. 1.23 consists of 

6 ti’cas (stanzas i — 18) which form a ritual series, stanzas 19 — 24 being an 

appendix. Now, unless the AV. borrowed its four stanzas RV. 16 — 19) 
directly from the redactorially finished RV. — a very unlikely assumption — 
these criteria lose something of their force as applied to the RV. itself; if 
their stringency in the RV. is not above suspicion, little confidence can be 
placed in similar operations in the AV., because they are in general depen- 
dant upon Rigvedic data. Without going so far as to say that the verse- 
norms of the Atharvanic books should be ignored in judging the histdrical 
make-up of the hymns, extreme scepticism is for the present the proper frame 
of mind. I say, for the present, because the prospect of having the other 
Atharvan SainMta, the Paippalada, in our hands soon is now very good: 
certainly even the most enthusiastic believer in these studies will be in favor 
of deferring them until the Saunaklya’s sister^sainhita discloses its treasure 
of facts. Hence similar observations for the remaining books will not be here 
undertaken: they would indeed requir'e the freedom and space of an inde- 
pendent essay We must not, however, fail to draw attention to the fact 
that the ritual of the Atharvan, as that of the RV., generally recognizes hymns 
that are clearly composite by employing each part independently with a true 

sense of its proper value. Hillebrandt has discussed and illustrated this 

point for the RV.^*^; the present writer for the AV.^s. Composite hymns of 
this sort are 4. 28 in' two parts; 7. 56 in two parts, stanzas 5 ff. wanting in 
AVP., and rubricated separately Kaui 139-3; the two hymns 7. 74 and 7. 76 
are tripartite and consist of heterogeneous stanzas which are employed pro* 
periy in the Sutra finally the checkered hmtdjfa-h.yxnns are divided pro- 
perly in the ritual tradition of all schools that take occasion to introduce 

them (see below, $ 63). 

We have seen that the first seven books are a.rranged on the basis of 
the number of stanzas in the hymns; the numbers ascend from book — 5, 
descend from book 6 — 7. Books 8 — 18, with the exception of 15 and 16, 
consist of long hymns; the shortest hymn (8. i) in these is longer than the 
longest in the first seven books (hymn 5- 17 of 18 stanzas). We may note 
also that the shortest hymn, again barring books 15 and 16, stands at the 
beginning of the entire series; the longest at the end (hymn 18. 4 with 89 
stanzas). Further, books 8 — ii consist of 10 hymns each; after that the numbers 



38 11. Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


descend in book 12 (5 hymns), 13 (4 hymns); 14 (2 hymns), and 17 (one 
hymn); cf. the arrangement according to anuvakas, below. Again, book 8 
has the shortest hymns with an average of 25. 8 stanzas to a hymn; next, 
book 9 with an average of 30. 5 stanzas to a hymn; next, book 10 with an 
average of 35 stanzas to a hymn. But book ii interrupts this ascending 
scale with an average of 31. 3 stanzas to a hymn, and after that this cri- 
terion, if it be more than an accident, is no longer applicable. Instead, 
another element of division rules the arrangement of the books, namely the 
division into anuvakas: the books are arranged from 8 — 17 according to the 
number of anuvakas in a descending scale. Books 8 — 13 have 5 anuvakas 
each; book 13 has 4; books 14 — 16 have two each; and book 17 has i 
anuvaka. Book 1 8, to be sure, again disturbs this descending scale with its 

4 anuvakas. As far as books 13 — iS are concerned, the prominence of the 
anuvaka-arrangement which plays no role in the first 7 books at all, is brought 
into view by the plural, duals, singular, and then again plural in the catalogue of 
these books, AV. 19, 23. 23 — 28: rohitebhyah svdha^ plural (book 13); 
surydhJiymi svdha^ dual (book 14); vrdtydhhydiii svd/id, dual (book 15); 
prdjdy>aiydhhyam svdhd (why this designation?), dual (book 16); visdsahyai 
svdhd, singular (book 17);' and, mangalikebliyah svdhd ^ plural (book iS)^7. 

$ 37. Arrangement of the hymns within the books. — Within 
a given book, the hymns are on the whole not arranged at all, but seem to 
follow one upon the other pell-mell, with little reference to their subject 
matter, or any other discernible criterion. The numerical scheme of each 
book, to begin with, prevents the grouping of all related hymns. Thus 7. 65 
is too short to take its place by the side of the hymns to the apamarga-^ 
plant, 4. 17 — 19; the hymn 12. 5, on the other hand, is too long to figure 
by the side of 5.17 — 19, though they are all curses against the oppressors of 
Brahmans. Similarly 5. -23 is prevented by its length from joining the charms 
against worms (2. 32, 33). Yet a considerable amount of the material is 
obviously arranged according to subject matter: two, three, four, and rising 
from that to as high as twelve hymns, dealing with quite or nearly the same 
theme, are grouped in the same place. The last-mentioned number is the 
highest, being exhibited by 6. no— 121, all of which deal with expiation 
{prdyasaita) of sins^^. The next largest number, seven, is represented by 
the so-called mrgdra-]xymm, 4.23—29 (see §§ 45, 57); the group 2.18—23 
contains 6 imprecations against enemies. Book 3 begins with an anuvaka in 

5 hymns connected with royal practices (i^ — 5); in a certain sense the five 
hymns of entire anuvaka 4.16 — 20, dealing with witchcraft, are made of the 
same stuff. Four groups of 4 hymns each are 7. 35—38 (women’s charms); 
7. 46 — 49 (divinities of the moon ' and heavenly wives); 19. 40—43 {brahma^ 
tapas^ dihsd); and 19. 47 — 50 (Night). Very much more frequent are groups 
of tliree: r. 4— 6 (water-charms); i. 19—21 (battle-charms); 1. 22—24 (skin- 
diseases); 2. 15—17 (prose-formulas to secure long life); 4. 17 — 19 (charms 
with the apdmdrga-plmt); 5.17—19 (against oppressors of Brahmans); 6. 
22—24 (water); 6. 27—29 (ominous birds); 6.34— 36 (Agni-hymns) ; 6. 39—41 
(/!?^z'/.r-hymn$: see § 60, end); 6. 65 — 67 (battle-charms); 6. 86—88 (rulership): 

6. 97— 99 (battle-charms); 6. 130—132 (love-charms); 7. 14—16 (Savitar); 

7. 17—19 (Dhatar); 7, 79 — 81 (lunar); 12. 3—5 (in the interest of Brahmans) ; 
19. 9 — II (s'dnfa and s'am); *19. 14^ — 16 (freedom from danger); 19. 17* — 19 
(prose litanies for protection); and 19, 28 — 30 (amulet of darb/ia). And then' 
there are in addition some sixty or more pairs of hymns more or less allied 
in subject-matter: in general their connection is too obvious to require special 
statement; at times it needs to be watched for rather closely, as, e. g. in the 



II The A.-V. in the School of Saunaka. — A. Division and Arrangement. 39 


case of 2. 1, 2 (Vena and Gandharva); 4. i, 2 (brahma and ka)) 7. i, 2 
(manas and mb); 7. 8, 9 (journey and road); 6.’ 47, 48 (the three savanas); 
7. 27, 28 and 98, 99 (ritualistic pairs); 7. 76 (end) and 77 (Indra and Maruts); 
II. 7, 8 (both theosophic, sharing the padas: 7. 25^^ = 8. 4^^^, 26^^^*’ and 7. 
26^^ = 8. 24^^). Of special importance for the future final history of the 
Samhita is the undoubted prehistoric and organic connection of some of the 
groups; they appear together many times not only because they deal with 
the same theme, but because a given group in an earlier period of mantra- 
production made up one and the same hymn, or two or more hymns bearing 
upon the same theme and the same occasion. Thus the mrgdra-gxoM-^ 
(4. 23 — 29) is undoubtedly built up on a rather slender tradition oi yajus- 
materials; the first and last stanzas are almost always directly derived from 
some Yajus-collection, the interior five stanzas are the original product of the 
Atharvanist’s muse^^. Of the group 2. 19 — 23 the first seems also originally 
yajus~mzx\ti (MS. i. 5. 2; ApS. 6. 21. i): out of these passages the entire 
litany is produced by a kind of Atharvanic inflation * 5 ®. There is a similar 
historic and organic connection between the four hymns 7. 46 — 49; the three 
hymns i. 4 — 6; 6. 27 — 29; 7. 39 — 41; and 7. 79 — 81; the two hymns 1.20, 
21; 24, 25; 2. 32, 33; 4. 31, 32; 6. 87, 88; 125, 126; 9. 9, 10; 19. 7, 8; 22, 23 
and 60, 61. A more complete sifting of the mantras will disclose other groups 
of this kind, and on the other hand the record of some connections of this 
sort is sure to have perished (e. g., perhaps, in the case of 1. 7, 8; 6. 103, 
1 04; 10. 7, 8 ; 1 1. 9, 10, etc.). Not infrequently the hymns are grouped for reasons 
that are far more superficial and hap-hazard than those just mentioned. The 
present writer drew attention to facts of this sort in connection with the 
first book, as did later Henry in connection with the seventh book 3 ==; they 
appear sporadically throughout 'the Samhita. In the first place, just as the 
introductory hymn i. i and the closing hymn of book 19 hold their places 
because of their subject-matter, so there is design in the opening-hymns of 
books 2, 4,- 5, and 7, all of which begin with a theosophic or brahmodya-h.jmn 
in loftier diction. The 'grouping of 9. 5 — 7 seems to be due to the large 
patch of brd/i?nana-^xosQ contained in them. Hymns i. 2, 3 and 7. 6, 7 (Aditi 
and Diti) deal in each pair with opposite rather than same themes. Above 
all verbal correspondences, at times so vague as to cast doubt upon one or 
the other of the following observations, seem to be the sole cause of the 
juxtaposition of hymns. Thus i. 9, 10 are not connected by theme, but each 
contains the word vanma in the opening hemistich. Hymns ii — 13 are 
linked by subtle correspondences: hymn 11 is a charm for easy delivery in 
childbed, ending with the refrain, ava jardyit padyatdm; hymn 12 begins 
with the word jardyujal}^ its theme being the ‘cloud-placenta-born' lightning; 
then follows hymn 13 also addressed to lightning (root stan in 12. i and 
13. 1)3^, The word mjra links externally. 6. 134 and 135; the words 
and stanayitnu 7. 10 and 111 ava mr/ and apa mrj 7. 64 and 65; pra/dmntab 
md- pra/dva^Tb 7. 74 and 75; vrhau and vrkkau 7. 95 and 96; stem ka, 
felt to be the same as prajdpati, 7. 100 and loi; stem rakso/zan 8. .2. 28 
and 3. i; stem prdm ii. 3, 54 ff. and ii. 4; sdpz and sam (as occasionally 
in parallel versions of the same mantra) 19. i, 2; Mnba and sam 19. 9 — ii. 
The group 7. 88—90 seems to be linked by a cumulation of verbal corre- 
spondences: they begin respectively with the w'ords api, apa, and api; 88 and 
89. I contain the root prc; and sepe in 89. 3 is perhaps correlated with iepo 
iii 90.3. In the group 7. 113— 115 such an external correspondence can 
be made critically helpful: 7. 113 and 114.1 obviously treat the same subject, 
whereas 114. 2 is foreign to their theme, and may have gotten this' berth 



40 II. Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


because its words preto yaniu^ as well as its sense, concatenate plausibly with 
7. XI 5. I which begins, pra patetafp\ cp- below, $ 40. 

The Samhita-text of the AV. in the ^aunakl3?a-school was published in 1855 by R. 
Roth and W. D. Whitney under the title, Atharva Veda Sanhita: the edition is 
occasionally spoken of as the vulgate by the present and other writers. This was 
followed by a number of subsidiary publications' by Whitney: an alphabetic list 
of pratikas ^ or verse-beginnings, in IS. IV. pff.; the edition of the Atharva-Veda- 
Pratisakhya, or Saunaklya Caturadhyayika in JAOS. VIL 333 — 615 (addenda, JAOS. 
X, 156 ff.); and an Index Verborum to the published text which at the same time 
reproduces the readings of the pada-text (JAOS. XII). Whitney’s posthumous 
work, containing other indexes, critical notes to' the text, and a translation is now 
in the press of the Harvard Oriental Series (ed. C. R. Lanman): see JAOS. XV. 
CLXXI ff. Another edition of the same Veda in both samhita and pada^iotm^ with 
a fragmentary commentary ascribed to Sayana, is partly published and wholly in 
the press, under the title Atharvavedasamhita (Bombay 1895); If from the pen 
of the late Shankar Pandurang Pandit. The value of the commentary is stated 
critically by Whitney, Festgruss an Rudolf von Roth, p. 89 ff. For the Kashmirian 
version of the AV., the so-called Paippalada-Sakha (above p. 11), see Roth, Der 
Atharva-Veda in Kaschmir (Tubingen 1875); it is now proposed by the present 
author to publish a photographic reproduction of the unique manuscript of that 
Veda; see the circular to that effect issued by the Johns Hopkins University in 1898, 
and JAOS. XX. i84ff. 

I Weber, IS. XIII. 433; WL.2, p. 161, note. The statements of both GB. and 
Mahabhasya refer in this matter to an Atharvanic tradition broader than that of 
the vSaunaklya, since both texts present sam no devl (1, 1. 6) as the initial stanza. 
This probably suits the AVP.; see Kaurika, Introduction, p. xxxvii ff. — 2 The 
beginnings of the books of AVP. and their relation in general to the books of the 
Saunaklya are stated above, p. 14, on the authority of Roth, Der AV. in Kaschmir, 
p. 15 ff., 18. — i See below, SS 3^ and 37. — 4 Roth, ibid. p. ,18. AV. 19.56 — 58 
are directly designated as paippalMamanirdh^ Ath. Pari§. 8. 2: see above p. 12. — 
S Weber, IS. IV, 433, note 2. ^ They occur, in fact, in full text, at the end of 

the Uttamapatala, Ath. Paris. 46 ; cp. Weber, ib. 433. — 7 The expression, brahmane 
sva/ia, which Weber, ib. 433, note 3, suspects as referring to book 19, is a mere 
general ending to both lists 19. 22. 20 and 23. 29: it invokes itrahma^ prayer, in 
general; cp. the metrical sts. at the end of each chapter. — ^ See Kaus. Introd. 
p. XL, and cp, PiscHEL, GGA., April 1891, p. 283. — 9 Whitney, JAOS. VII. 334, 
581; ShaS’kar Bandit’s edition, voL I, Critical Notice, p. 24. — w Weber, IS. IV, 
432. — *1 Roth, ibid. p. 18. — ^2 Shankar Pandit, ibid. p. i6ff. — ^3 astnm 
kdn 4 ( prdyena sarvani suktani ircdtmakany eva iathdpi adhydpakasampradayanurddhemi 
ifcadva^fam eklkrtya silktaivena vyavahriyate (Say ana, vol. II, p. 2). — H See Indexes, 
p. 382. The paryaya are also alluded to in the late Parisista-hymn 19. 22. 7. The 
date of AV. 19. 22 and 23 can be fixed as later than the Kaurika. In 22. 11-— 13 
the formulas npotiamebhyah svahd^ icUamehhyah svdhd^ and uttarebhyah svaha allude 
without doubt to the frequent citations in Kaus. of hymns and stanzas which have been 
previously stated in groups. See for ttpoiiama^ Kau§. 26. 34; for uUama^ Kau§. 26, 40; 
41. IS; 50. 14; for Kaus. 4S. 36. — ^5 Differently Weber, IS. I. 295; 11, 396; 

IV. 434 ; V. 22, 77 ; SPAW. 1 89 1 , p. 770, note l ; WL.2 1 37, 165 ; cp. SBE. XLif, p. XXL — 
16 Cp. Bergaigne. Recherches sur Phistoire de la Samhita du Rig-Veda, I, p. 4 and 
75 (JA. 1886;; W^ER, IS. XVII. 178; XVIIL I, 154. — x? Tlfe Anukramani of the 
AV. designates this lower limit as the norm {prakrli) of the books, the deviations 
as vikrii\ see Weber, I c. Bergaigne, 1. c.*; Oldenberg, Die Hymnen des 
Rig-Veda, p. 243^* — *9 Oldenberg, I. c, — ao Cp. SBE. XLTI. 274 ff. — 
21 Bloomfield, JAOS. XVII. 178; Weber, IS. XVIIL 66; SBE. XLIL 348. — 
sa Cp. SBE. XLIL 233 ff. — 23 As further sppcimttts of hymns that invite such 
criticism we may mention 2. 3, 4 (last sts,); 2.* lo (cp. TB. 2. 5.6. i; HG. 2, 3. 10; 
ApMB. 2. 12. 6); 2. 12 (last 3 sts,; cp. SBE. XLIL 297} ; 2. 14,(51.4; cp. ibid, 301); 
3. IS, 19, 29 (last two sts.); 3. 30 (the irregular st, 6 interrupts the concatenation 
of 5 7* see SBE. XLIL 363); 4. 2 (last st.); 4. 16 (last two sts.); 4. 17 

(st S, rather extraneous « 7, 23); 5. 17 (Bergaigne, L c., p. 22; Oldenberg, L c., 
p. 244). — ^4 BB. VIIL' 195 ff.; ZDMG. XI.. 708 ff. ; cp. Weber, SPAW, 1891, 
p. 798. — 25 Kaiisika, Introduction, p. XLi. — 2^ vSBE. XLIL 554, 557, 559. — 
s? Cp. Bergaigne, I. c., p, 75, note. — 28 in a less specific way all the hymns 
19. 26 — 39 deal with amulets of some sort, and therefore represent a still larger 
group of 14 hymns. — 29 See below, 3545 and 57, — 3® In accordance with notions 
very prominent in GB. The Rig-Yedic cosmic triad, Agni, VSyu, Silrya, is there 



IL The A.-V. in the School of Saunaka. — B. Metres of the Atharvan. 41 


swelled out to a tetrad by the addition of Candra and Apah (the moon with the 
waters) to provide for the AV,, the other three being correlated with the members 
of the trayt vidya; see S 45. — 3 ^ Seven Hymns of the AV., AJPh. VII. 470 ff.; 
Le Livre VII de I’AV., p. ix. — 32 The first 13 hymns of book i seem to be 
arranged continuously in groups; after that the regularity of the scheme breaks 
down; cp. Seven Hymns, ibid. 

B. THE metres of THE ATHARVAN AND THEIR RELATION TO 
THE CRITICAL RESTORATION OF THE TEXT. 

S 38. The metres, with special reference to the Atharvanic 
(popular) anustubh. — The metres of the original parts of the AV. are in 
the main still the common Vedic metres, gayatri, anustubh, pahkti, in^ short 
metre; tristubh, and jagati, in long metre. A considerable part of the Sauna- 
klya-text, notably book 15 and most of book 16, are in prose metrical 
and prose matter are a good deal mixed np^^ so that it is frequently difficult 
to determine whether a passage is merely cadenced prose, or doggerel metre, 
or originally good metre spoiled by interpolations and additions which at 
times distinctly betray themselves as glosses. The Brhatsarvanukramani, in 
the course of its struggles with these defective metres, enriches the metrical 
terminology with new varieties: the words, nicrt^ bhurij^ -garb/id (e. g. virad- 
garbkd bhurik)^ drsJ, etc. figure frequently 3 . The metres vary in the same 
hymn more than is customary in the RV.: it would seem as though this 
variation was in a measure felt to be a stylistic or literary devicek E. g., it 
is hardly mere accident that many hymns open with a (to our feeling) livelier 
anustubh stanza (short metre), and continue with tristubh-stanzas (long metre;; 
see I. 13; I. 18; 29; 4. 16; 6. 3. 6.49; 7. 68; 7. 72 (cp. RV. 7. 103;. 

Occasionally an anustubh-hymn opens in still livelier gayatrl: 2. 32; 4. 12. 
Conversely some effect, perhaps the opposite effect of solemnity, seems also 
to be intended when a short-metre hymn is introduced by a tristubh: 
2-4; 3. 5 ; 5*7; 6. III. It is perhaps no accident that the Vedic wedding- 
stanzas are prevailingly anustublis, the funeral-stanzas tristubhs. The metres 
of the AV, are on a level with those of the Grhyasutras. Aside from the 
greater freedom and irregularity of all types this is shown by applying Olden- 
BERG^s test of the anustubh 5 . The original Atharvanic anustubh stanzas, i. e, 
those that do not coincide with the hieratic RV. stanzas, differ from the 
Rig-Vedic anustubh on the one hand, and from the Epic and Buddhistic 
Moka on the other. Whereas in the RV. the first pada of the anustubh 
hemistich regularly ends in a diiambus, or second paeon — ), and 

in the Epic and Buddhistic slcka stiU more regularly in a first epitrite or 

antispast —), the first pada of the Atharvan and Grhya hemistich 

permits .these as 'vvell as all other possible feet of four syllables. The hymns 
that were tested for this purpose are: i, i; i. 2; i. 7; i. 8; 5. 19; and 12. 4.* 
I — 20, in addition to single stanzas of many other hymns. The Atharvanic 
and Gfhya anustubh may be designated as the popular anustubh in distinction 
from the hieratic anustubh of the soma-hymns in theRV.: a hymn like RV. 
10. 85 is, of course, in popular anustubh. Considering the absolute quan- 
titative freedom of the eight-syllable line of the Younger Avesta^, we have 
reason to assume that the popular . and freer anustubh is structurally and 
chronologically earlier than the better regulated hieratic (somic) anustubh, an 
assumption which is no wise disproved by the parallel grammatical and lexical 
criteria of the two types of literature (s^e below, § 42}. The theory that the 
development of the popular foot took place from through 

to is on its face implausible: in the light of the trend of 'all Hindu 



42 II Literature and History. i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


metrical development the change from the regulated type v/ _ w ^ to the 
free type is unparalleled and unintelligible. Instead we may assume 

that the Aryan free octosyllabic lines^ grouped into two hemistichs of i6 
syllables developed the iambic cadence at the end of each hemistich in pre- 
historic Vedic times, and continued so in the more popular poetry until the 
beginnings of the Epic and Buddhistic sloka. At the same time a more 
exquisite treatment at the hands of the hieratic poets developed the Rig-Vedic 
anustubh on a parallel liixe, by repeating the final cadence of the hemistich 
before the caesura in the middle of it'. 

§ 39. On the critical restoration of Atharvan metres. — Atharvan 
metres are so generally capable of improvement that we are in danger of 
singing our own rather than Atharvan hymns, when we apply ourselves to 
the task of improving them. An uneasy sense is left that we all know how 
to make -better verse-lines than those that have somehow got to be in vogue 
among the Atharvan writers; carried out to its full consequences this would 
eliminate one of the more marked peculiarities that render the Atharvan 
what it is^. Yet it is impossible to abstain entirely: such abstemiousness 
would suggest the equally mistaken view that all Atharvan stanzas are before 
us in the form in which they were originally composed. Great tact and a 
keen sense of where to draw the line are particularly required in amending 
the text: in any case the critic upon whom this task is forced may not hope 
to escape error altogether. In the very opening hymn (i. i. 4^^) it’ seems 
necessary to throw out the entirely unmetrical hvayatam^ although what remains 
is by no means perfect But there are far more certain cases: in 2. 3. 6^ 
raksasdm is surely a gloss; so also krbnin in 2. 31. 4^ In 2. 33. 5 bhasadmn 
is certainly superfluous, being derived from the parallel version, RV, 10. 163. 4. 
Quite certain are the following cases of interpolations anl glosses: devdn in 
3. 15. 5"^; brahfuajyasya in 5. 19. 7^; takmams in 5, 22. 5*^; bmdsd in 6. 40. 

svasH in 6. 40. 2^; diso in 6. 98. (cf. TS. 2. 4. 14. 1; MS. 4. 12. 2); 

daniau in 6. 140. 3*^; piiru in 7. 21. d€vd in 7. 70. 2^ (cf. TB. 2. 4. 2. 2); 

amitrd in 8. 8. 2^^; arsanir in 9. 8. 21^^; visvasya in 9. lo. 14^ (cf. RV. i. 164. 
35^; VS. 23. 62^; LS. 9. 10. 14^); duskrte in 10. i. 23®; vdr ngmm in 10.4. 

3^, 4^ (cf. 7. 56. 3^, 7^j; mdiarisvd in 10, 9. 26^; either ubhe or ime in ii. 

5. Ziprthivydifi in ii. 5. 1.2^^ ; caMsrab in 19. 1. Less certain is the dis- 
position of pabr in 3. 4. grhdndm in 3. 12. 6; gandharvdn in 4. 37. 8^; 
amilm in 5. 8. sacetasak in 6. 68. manasd in 6. 83. 4^; adharo in 6. 
134. 2®; kaiasa^ in 9. i. 6^; bhiksdm in ii. 5. 9^. And there are, of course, 
cases in which corrections of other sorts strengthen the impression that the 
metres may be ‘improved by critical restorations. Thus the defective pada 
9. 2. .4^ is followed in the same hymn, pada 9*^, by what reads like its own 
correction; or, the temptation to make over into good metre 9. 5, 1*^ so as 
to read, d naya eiam mv d rab/ian^a, sukrtdjfi lokam gachatu prujdnan^ is 
very great Similarly 11. 2. 2 may be much improved by transferring avisyavah 
at the end of the first hemistich (so also AVP.) to the second hemistich 
On the other hand there are not wanting instances in which inferior metre 
is on second thought proved to be just what the Atharvavedin wTOte. Thus 
9.4. 2 2 consists of two defective padas; the first being short, the second 
ending in a wrong cadence; dyur asmabhyam dadhat prajdm ca^ ray as ca 
pmair ablii nah sacatdm. All attempts to better this hemistich are wasted, 
because it is nothing but a secondary transfer from the plural to the singular 
of the perfectly good hemistich 18. 4. 62, dyur as?nab/iyam dadhatah prajdm 
ca^ ray as ca posair abhi ?iah sacadhvam. Or, one might be tempted to amend 
the short pada 2. 4. 6^, atho ardtidusih^ especially as it is repeated in a 



IL The A.-V. in the School of Saunaka, — B. Metres of the Atharvan. 4^ 


metrically preferable form in 19. 34. 4^, atho ardtidu$a 7 iah. But the entire 
character of the last hymn is inferior and its version of the pada is probably 
in the nature of a secondary lectio facilior\ the catalectic line, 2, 4. 6^, had 
best be left undisturbed, as such lines must be in many other instances 
Anyway there, are almost countless cases in the AV. in which corrections 
at the hand of the metre would really amount to independent composition, 
cases like 3. 28. i; 4. ii. 4'’, 6 ^; 4. 17. 5. 7. 1=^^; 6. 134- 35 7- 76. 5^1 

not only point out the need of extreme caution in general, but tend to shake 
confidence in all but the i^nost unavoidable emendations. 

S 40. Order of stanzas and concatenation as critical aids. — 
Of distinct strophic arrangement of stanzas there is little or nothing in the 
AV.; the arrangement of the hymns in the various books according to the 
number of their stanzas is also . carried out in a very ' crude and superficial 
manner Hence there is very little basis for a critique of the arrangement 
of the stanzas in a given hymn, or the distinction between original stanzas 
and such as may have been added by a later hand. Nevertheless the e.xisting 
text is open to improvement in these respects, although subjective impression 
is here more easily than in other forms of criticism confounded with historical 
reality. To begin with, some h}mins are certainly composite, as may be readily 
gathered from their context and their employment in the ritual books; e. g. 
4. 38; 7. 74; 7. 76 For no visible reason, but yet certainly, 6. 48.^2 and 
3 have changed places: Vait. 17. 10 and the parallel versions have them in 
the right order ^• 3 . The long hymn 12. 4 shows traces of confusion in the 
order of its stanzas: the fourth may be suspected of having stood originally 
after the fifth, because the second hemistich of st. 4 seems to summarize the 
statements made in the remaining three hemistichs of the two stanzas. Simil- 
arly there seems to be considerable confusion in the order of stanzas 43 — 47: 
cf. the rearrangement proposed by the author When we find in the midst 
of the wedding-stanzas of the suryd-sukta (14. i. i If. === RV. 10. 85. i tfj the 
stanza 14. i. 17, which is evidently RV. 7. 59. 12 in a form adapted to the 
marriage-rites {aryamamj^t substituted for tryainbakatn')^ we may judge at least 
that it did not belong to the original stock of the wedding-stanzas; on the 
other hand the concatenation of its second hemistich with 1 8^^ would seem 
to show that it was adapted to serve in the very place where it occurs in 
the AV. Similar considerations will show that the stanza 14. i. 43, in con- 
catenation with 44, although , also of secondary workmanship — it occurs 
nowhere else — ^ yet hplds its place by rights in the AV. Concatenation is 
a very common feature in the AV.^ 5 ^ and to a certain extent guarantees the 
order of stanzas in the Samhita. Thus all three stanzas of 6. 42 and 6. i iS 
concatenate, so that we may feel fairly 'sure that the Atharvan composer 
placed them in this order, whatever may have been their pre-history, whether 
they were original with the Atharvanist, or first composed in another quarter 
ofVedic activity. So also the first two stanzas of 6.1 18 occur again MS. 4. 14. 
17; TA. 2. 4, I (cp. TB. 3. 7. 12. 3), the third seems original with the Athar- 
vanist; yet it is not therefore in any sense a stranger to the Atharvan redac- 
tion. The same rhetorical device of concatenation may 'at times point to 
the exclusion of one of the connected stanzas; e. g. the irregular stanza 5. 
14. II, containing the expression mrgiva^ may have slipped in because of 
mrgmi iva in stanza 12; or 5. 4. 6, also irregular, contaihing the words d 
va/ia^ may have been placed where it is, because of nirdvahafi in stanza 5. 
Again, a verse that interrupts two concatenating stanzas may be suspected; 

g* 3- 3^- interrupting stanzas 5 and 7; or 2. 3. 4, interrupting stanzas 3 
and 5; cp. also our remark on 7. 1 14.2, above, S 37, end. In the commentary to 


44 n. Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


our translation, SEE. XLII, we have never treated such cases as anything 
more than possibilities: -such criteria rarely seem coercive, as we have no 
reason to rely mucjh on the conscious directness of purpose, or certainty of 
touch of the Atharvan poets in any such matters. 

^ A compact list of the prose passages is printed by Whitney, Inde::fc Verborum, 
p. _ 2 Cp. e. g., 4* 3- 7 ^^; 4- U* 7^1 4* 6; 5. 29. 14; 6. 16. 3; 6. 76. 3c; 

7. 81. 4, 5; 7. 82. 2; 8. 2. II; 10. 6. 35. — 3 Cp. the extracts from the Anukra- 
manl in Weber’s translations of AV. 3 — 5, IS. XVII. 177 XVIII, iff. — 
4 Bloomfield, JAOS. XVII. 176, note. 5 ZDMG. XXXV. 181 ff.; XXXVII. 62 ff.-; 
Die Hymnen des Rig-Veda, p. 26 ff.; SBE. XXX, p. xifg., xxxvff.; cp. Jacobi, IS. 
XVII, 442 ff. — 6 Geldner, Metrik des jungeren Avesta, p. viff., 60 ff. — 7 Cp, 
WiNTERNiTZ, The Mantrapatha, Introd. p. XLiv. — ^ Bloomfield, SBE. XLII, p. 296, 
584; Oldenberg, DLZ. March 1S97, p. 370. — 9 SBE. XLII. 619. — ^0 Cp. Whitney, 

' Index Verborum, p. 5. — See above, S 37- ““ Introd., p. XLiff.; cp. 

above, $ 36. — ^3 See Bloomfield, Contributions. Fifth Series. JAOS. XVL 5, 
note 3; cp. in the Samhita itself the proper arrangement of the corresponding 
stanzas 6. 47. 2 and 3. — ^4 SBE. XLII, p. 660. - — ^5 E. g. l. 23. i, 2; 4. i. 
4b, 4Cj 4. 8. 4, 5, 6; 4. 29* L 2; 4. 36. 3, 4; 4* 37- 9, 10; 5. ii. 7, 8, 9; 
5. 14. I, 2; 5. 20. I, 2; 5. 22. 3, 4, 5J 5- 22. 8, 9; 5., 29. 2, 3; 5. 29. 12, 13; 

5. 30. 8, 9; 6. 15. I, 2; 6. 63. 2, 3; 6. 99. 2, 3; 6. 117. 2, 3; 6. 123. i, 2; 

6. 138. I, 2; 8. 2. 7, 8; 9. 2. 9, 10; 9. 5. 21, 22; 9. 5. 23, 24; lo: 8. 22, 23; 

12. 3- 5» ^2. 3. 41, 42; 12, 3. 43» 44; 13- I- 6, 7; 13- 53, 54* 


C. THE RELATION OF THE ATHARVA-VEDA TO THE REMAINING 

HYMN-COLLECTIONS. 

§ 41.^ Special features of the Atharvan collection; its connection 
with ApS. and TB. — The relation of the te.xt of the AV. in the Sauna- 
klya-version to the other collections of Vedic mantras is both intimate and 
intricate. A complete survey of these relations can be obtained only by 
means of such a concordance of these mantras as has been gathered up by 
Whitney for his posthumous work on the AV., now passing through the press 
in the Harvard Oriental Series \ A yet more perfect insight into the relation- 
ships of the Atharvan mantras will result from the pada-concordance of the 
entire body of Vedic mantras which is being compiled by the present writer® 
The Atharvan is very reminiscent: in unexpected places, often in hymns that 
are on the whole original with the AV., a shorter or longer passage, fre- 
quently only a single pada, appears to have been borrowed from another 
connection, or, to state it more cautiously, to coincide with another collection. 
Thus in the very first hymn pada 3^= RV, 10. 166. 3^; in the second hymn 
padas 2®^ are variants of RV, 6, 75. 12®^, pada 2^=* RV. 3. 16. 5^. Other 
instances of fragmentary correspondences are AV. i. 17. 4^= RV. 1. 191, 6^; 
AV. RV. 1.172.2^; AV. 2. 2. 2^== RV. 8. 48. 2^; AV. 2. 12. 4^== 

RV. 7 - 44* 4^; AV. 4. 4. 4^ « RV. 10. 97. 8^ (et al); AV. 4. 5. 7^ RV. 10. 
166. 2^; AV. 4, 10. 6 ^ (formulaic appendage =* 2. 4. 6*^; 12. 2. 13^; 14. 2. 
67<^) is common in the entire mantra-literature; AV, 5. 20. RV. 10. 103. 
10^ (cp. 'To^); AV. 5. 21. ,(« *13., I. 3®^) «« TB. 2, 5. 2. 3**^; ' AV. 6. 

80. « RV. 10. 136. 4®^; AV. 8. 7. 27^ RV. 10. 97, 3^; AV. 10. r. 

RV, IP. 164. 4^; AV. 10., 8. 40^*^ « RV. 8, 101. 14 ^^; AV, 10. 9. 27^ RV. 
4. 50, 6"^ ’(et al.); AV. 10. 10. 32®^— RV. to. 154. i*^; AV. ii. i. 3*^, 

RV, 4, 50, 10^; AV. 13. I. RV. 10. 123. 8^; and many other instances. 

These correspondences fade out into mere reminiscences or echoes, as when, 
e. g., AV.3. 1.2 is made up from a variety of RV. motives (Aufrecht, KZ. 
XXVII. 219; Bloomfield, SBE. XLII 326). Similarly AV. 3. 3. 2^, 5^ reminds 
one of RV. 10. 103. 6; or AV. 4. 7. 2, 3 of RV. 10. 187. 10; or AV. 5, 23 



II The A.“V. in the School of Saunaka. — C.-Relation to other Collections. 4 5 


In this connection are to be mentioned a number of interesting or curious 
points of contact of the Atharvan mantras with the remaining body of the 
Vedic hymns and formulas. AV. i. 17. i is quoted by Yaska, Nirukta 3. 4, 
in a variant form which is not derived from AVP.; Durga to Nir. 6. 1 2 quotes 
AV. 12. 2. 28 with variants (perhaps those of AVP.J: see Roth, Erlautenmgen, 
p, 80. The JB. quotes in full AV. 5. 19. i with variants. AV. 4. 16 is un- 
known in the other collections, except that its sixth stanza is modulated 
interestingly SS. i. A formula LS. 3. .5. 15 reproduces AV. 9. i. 9. and 
a mantra in Vait 36. 27. contains marked features derived from AV. 13. 1.23. 
The prose formula AV. 19. 55. 5® is a variant form of MS. 3. 9. 4 (p. 120, 

I 17), and the formulas AV. 20. 2 are somewhat independent versions of ApS. 
II. 9. 8; KS. 9. 8. 9 ff. The fifth st. of AV. 3. 4 is (pioted with a variant 
pratika, d prehi paramasydh pardvafd (iti ydjyd 7 iuvdkye) at MS. 2.2. ii (p. 24, 

1. 3), but no such two stanzas are quotable elsewhere in the Maitrayai.il, or 
anywhere else in the literature: the pratika at MS. is employed in connection 
with a royal rite similar to that at the base of the Atharvan hymn. Quite a 
number of those sts. of the SV. which are not derived from the RV. occur 
also in the AV., as may be seen readily in A-ufrecht’s list of these sts. in 
the Introduction to the second edition of »Die Hymnen des .Rig-Veda«, 
p. XLV ff. The correspondences of Atharvan and Grhya-stanzas are very ex- 
tensive, and often disguised by corruptions and secondary manipulations of 
the original text: both varieties of mantras perform their share of these pro- 
cesses, but the mantras of the Grhyasutras are even more corrupt than those 
of the AV. Cp. as examples AV. 5. 25. 8 with SG. i. 19. ii; AV. 3. 10. 1 
with SMB. 2. 8. i; or AV. 8. 6. 26 with HG., i. 19. 7. Noteworthy, above all, 
are the special correspondences of the ApS. with the AV., showing depen- 
dence of the Sutra upon the AV.: the variants of the ApS. are generally of 
inferior quality. Thus AV. 2. 7. i is reproduced in a corrupt form ApS. 6. 
21. 2; the two sts. AV. 3,7. 1,2 appear, with inferior variants, ApS. 13. 7.16; 
the opening sts. of AV. 5. 6 recur secondarily ApS. 16. 18. 7; part of the 
formula AV. 5. 9. 8 occurs at the beginning of ApS. 6. 21; the st. AV. 7.27 
recurs with variants ApS. 4. 13-4; AV. 8. 5. 19 appears with essential differences 
in ApS. 16. 19. I, and similarly AV. 9. 5. 2 in ApS. 7. 17. 2, or AV. 12. i. 55 
in ApS. 5. 9. ii; the two sts. AV. 12. 2. 13, 14 are varied even more ApS. 9. 
3.22; especially noteworthy is the reproduction of the obscure formulas A V. 
16. 2. 4 in ApS. 6. 20. 2 (end). We may also note that ApS. 16. 16. i re- 
produces with variants some of the slokas in Kaus, 97. 8, as a sign of con- 
nection between the two sphere.s of mantra-tradition. Quite a considerable 
number of Atharvan hymns and stanzas recur in TB. and, apparently, nowhere 
else: e. g., AV. i. 23, 24 in TB. 2. 4. 4. i, 2; AV. 2. lo in TB. 2. 5. 6. i ff.; 
AV, 4. 8 in TB. 2. 7. 15 and 16; AV. 4. 22 in TB., 2. 4. 7. 7!!; AV. 6, 38 in 
TB. 2. 7. 7. iff.; AV. 6. 75 in TB. 3. 3. ii. 3 (ApS. 3. 14. 2); AV. 7. 70 in 

TB. 2. 4. 2, i ff.; AV. 7. 99 in TB. 3. 7. 6. i ; AV. 7. no in TB. 2. 4» 5. 7; 

AV. 13. I (in part) iii TB. 2. 5. 2. i ff. Since the TB. is the Brahmana of 

ApS. this marked relationship of both these texts with the AV. may possibly 

not be without significance; it seems to reach decidedly beyond that general 
connection which may be expected in all mantra-collections: no such degree 
of intimacy exists, e. g., between the AV. and the cprresponding texts attaching 
themselves to the White Yajur-Veda, namely the SB. and KS. 

S 42, Relation of the language of the AV. to that of the RV. — 
All discussions of the relation of the Saunaklya-Samhita to the other Vedic 
collections must be regarded as provisional as long as the text of the AVP. 
remains inaccessible. Still certain general statements as to the relationship of 



46 II Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana, 


the SaunakTya-coliection with the RV. on the one hand, and the Yajur-Vedas 
on the other, are not likely to be subject to great change upon the accession 
of new materials. With the RV. the Saunaklya shares about one seventh of 
its material, if we leave aside the hymns of book 20 that are borrowed 
directly from the RV.- 3 . Considerably more than one half of the RV. sts. 
which correspond to the AV. belong to the tenth book of the RV., largely 
the last anuvaka of that book; about one sixth to the first book; about one 
tenth to the seventh book; about one eighth to all the other books put 
together‘s. In the overwhelming number of cases, aside from the wedding 
stanzas (AV. 14), and the funeral stanzas (AV. 18), the material common to 
the two Samhitas is Atbarvanic in character, i, e. it consists of charms friendly 
or hostile; on the other hand the more general prayers which have for their 
theme the adoration of a given divinity, rather than the attainment of a spe- 
cific object, are rarely shared by the two collections. The two styles of hymns 
may be conveniently designated as popular or Atharvanic on the one hand, 
and hieratic or ritualistic on the other. The language of the former class is 
related more closely to that dialect or dialects which are at the base of the 
language of the Brahmanas, Sutras, and the later literary forms in general. 
For reasons that are nearly always one-sided and subjective, sometimes 
patently erroneous, the language of the popular or Atharvanic hymns is gene- 
rally regarded as chronologically later than that of the hieratic hymns, and 
thus every Vedic hymn that deals with popular matters is condemned on 
account of its language to a berth in the ‘later Vedic period’. The scope 
of the present work does not permit the full discussion of this important 
question: suftice it to say that many linguistic forms that are looked upon as 
indications of late date are in reality as old, sometimes older, than the entire 
individual period of the Aryan language in India. Thus the dual in and 
the instrumental plural though dealt with in such discussions as signs 

of a later time are Indo-European forms ^ (Goth. Lith. vilkms)^ similarly 

the ‘late’ forms, stems, or roots hvayami^ karomi-kuruy panthdnam, sarva (as 
compared with visvd)^ reap for sas^ which have been regarded 

as signs of late date are each of them prehistoric s. The question is there- 
fore largely one of degree of closeness to the popular dialect or style of 
diction: this is the primary point of view from which the language of what 
we liave called Atharvanic, or popular h)nmns can be compared with the 
hieratic hymns. A given fonii is not necessarily of recent origin because it 
begins to crop out in the tenth book of the RV., appears still more frequently 
in the popular Vedic collection of the AV., and is the regular form of the 
post-inautric language; nor, consequently, are hymns necessarily late because 
they abound in .words and forms that are strangers to the diction of the 
hieratic hymns. A necessary preliminary to a final study of the relative 
chronology of the Vedic hymns is their separation into at least two classes 
which grew up along parallel lines, the hymns connected with the soma- 
worship and the hymns connected with popular practices. They ate largely 
synchronous: each is addicted to its own dialect, differing from the other in 
lexicon, grammar, style, and metrical habits^ 

That the purely linguistic data alone are a broken reed in support of 
the chrofiological fixation of a given hyxun may be illustrated by a comparison 
of AV. 3. 18 with RV, 10. 145. The second st of the RV. ends in k//ru foi 
which AV. reads krdkz : now is ‘late’, and krdki is‘ol<r, i. e. it belongs 
to the hieratic sphere of diction. To sifppose therefore that the Atharvan form 
of the hymn is older than that of the RV. would at first sight be tlie orthodox 
conclusion, but In st, 3 AV. reads ‘late’ tor RV. and the RV. 



ILThe A.-V. intheSchool ofSaunaka. — C. Relation to other Collections. 47 


readings, para dhaina for para nuda (st. 2); athd sapatnl (RV. 3) for adhah 
sapatfil (AV. 4); grbhnami (RV. 4) for jagraha (AV. 3); atha tvam for atko 
tram (st. 5)7 make a better impression, and a decidedly strong case for the 
RV., rather than for the AV., as representing the original version of the hymn 
at the back of both redactions. The AV. has slipped into the hieratic diction 
in the case of krdhi^ whereas kuru was quite natural in a popular hymn 
from the very earliest times, although, of course, it is also possible that kuru in 
the RV. was substituted in a popular mood for krdhi. All this is as though a 
preacher in the pulpit glided in and out of biblical diction in the course of 
his sermon : at one moment he may be employing the language of Isaiah or 
the Psalms; at another the most forceful popular speech of the day. The 
proximity of the language of the genuine Atharvanic hymns to that of the 
Brahraaiias and Classical Literature is no chronological criterion: only when 
what w'e have called hieratic hymns are modulated over into Atharvanic 
diction does the presumption of late date stand justified. Especially desirable 
is cumulative evidence: bad metre, obvious adaptation to secondary purposes, 
disjointedness of stanzas, and the like: they are the true Atharvan char- 
acteristics. 

With a view to all these considerations there can be no doubt that the 
redaction of the AV. is of later date than that of the' RV. ; that its external 
presentation by the diaskeuastae is less scholarly, or rather more ignorant 
than that of the RV.; that the secondary application of old hymnal material 
— a kind of popular etymology exercised upon the stanzas, as it were — 
is more common than in the RV.; that possibly some materials are directly 
derived from the ready made Rig-Vedic collection; and, finally, that a good 
part of the AV. was composed at a very late time. On the other hand it 
is equally certain that the main current of Atharvan tradition, the Atharvanic 
or popular hymns by distinction, goes back to a head-spring quite as far away 
and as high up in antiquity — if not more so — than the hieratic or ritualistic 
hymns. A hymn like AV. 4. 1 6, representing the better type of Atharvanic 
effi)rt, is quite as archaic as any RV. hymn of related character; a hymn 
like AV.4. 12 seems even to be rooted in prehistoric antiquity. The assumption, 
e. g., that none of the numerous medicinal charms of the AV., notably the 
charms against takman (fever), existed prior to the redaction of the RV. is 
not warranted, as we have seen, by linguistic criteria, and contrary to sound 
ethnological consideration. Precisely these and kindred hymns contain most 
abundantly the evidence of prehistoric origin: see, e. g., AV. 7. 116 (SHE. 
XLII, p. 4 and 565), That the RV. picked up quite a considerable number 
of Atharvanic charms (see Aufrecht’s edition, vol., 11 , p. 670 IF.), and passed 
by others, is due to its prevailing character of a Srauta Mantrapatha, so to 
say. The hieratic hymns were the theme that really concerned the RigvediiPs^ 
interest: of other material he took what was conveniently at hand, without 
aiming at and without being able to reach exhaustiveness. 

% 43. The various readings of the RV. and the AV. — The following 
selection of examples may illustrate the interrelation of the materials common 
to RV. and AV. In AV. i. 4. 4 the fourth pada is an Atharvanic addendum 
as compared with RV. i. 23. 19, and more particularly the other versions 
VS. 9. 6, etc.: the Atharvanist clinches the statement of pada c, bkavatka 
vjjinak^ by adding the othenvise unknown pada, bhavatha vdjmHu^ In 1.29 
manind for '/lavisd in RV. 10. 174, and the substitution of abhi vardh for 
tddii 7 !art seem to* represent later Atharvanic intensity. In 2. 12, 6 atzva 
inferior to ati vd, RV. 6* 52. 2. In 2. 33. 5^*^ the metrically superfluous 
bkdsadam is certainly a gloss derived from the RV. version, 10. 163.4. 




4^ II. Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


■ AV. 6. 91. 3^ as compared with RV, 10. 137, 6 ^ has the variant msvasj/a for 
sarz'asya: it is possible therefore to conceive of the Atharvan version of the 
St. as the older, though a ‘hieratic’ reminiscence may be all there is at the 
bottom of visvasya. But what is truly significant for the date of the Atharvan 
redaction is the occurrence of the same stanza in AV.3.7.5 with the last pada 
altered from, ias te kpwantu bhesajam, to, ias iva muncantu ksehnyat, indi* 
eating the adaptation of the stanza at an unquestionably later time to a 
secondary purpose. In AV. 3. ii. 4*^^ we may safely assume a later 
handling of the padas that appear RV. 10. 161. 3^^*^, 4^*^; especially AV, 4*=, 
satam ta indro agnih savitd brhaspatib^ must be later than RV. 4*^, satam 
indragm savitd brkas^atih. AV. 3. 15. 3 occurs identically in its proper 
connection RV. 3, 18. 3: the Vord ickamdno suggested its adaptability for the 
Atharvanic mixtum cqmpositum ; the following hemistich of AV. is also second- 
ary (RV. I. 31. 16^^), gathered in by the Atharvanist because it speaks of 
the ‘far road which we have travelled’, an expression too suitable to a 
merchants charm not to be, recruited into it®. In RV, 7, 41 we have pada 
havdmake^ but in padas 2^ huvema\ AV. 3. 16. i, 2 flattens them all 
qut to havdmahe\ without any prejudice against the stem hava- as ‘later’ it 
may be safely assumed that this old hieratic hymn was by these changes 
brought nearer to the popular diction at a later time. In 3. 17. 2^^*^ virdjali 
for gird ca^ and, d yavan for dyat or eyat^ RV. 10. loi. 3 and the Yajur- 
versions, are both odd and secondary. AV.3.31.5 is surely a mere mouthing 
over of RV. 10. 17. i (cp. AV. 18. i. 53). The theosophic hymn (Jiiranya- 
garbha) AV.4.2 is described by Weber, IS. XVIII 9, as a disguised, altered, 
and mutilated version of RV. 10. 121 (et al), adapted by the Atharvanist to 
the very use in which it appears Kaus. 45. lE: when a i. e., a suppos- 
edly sterile cow, is slain, and it turns out that she was pregnant, then this 
hymn is employed and adapted as a prdyakitta. Similarly a comparison of 
AV. 5. 2 with RV. 10. 120; of AV, 5. 3 with RV, 10. 128; of AY« b, 126 
with RV. 6, 47. 29 — 31 will reveal every time better tradition on the part of 
RV. AV, 4. 9,4 is an evident adaptation of st 12 of ‘the osadhistuti^ RV, 
10, 97 (et al). . In AV. 4. 21. 5^ ickdd is a modern corruption of achm 
(3^ sg. of r-aorist from root chand)^ RV. 6 . 28. 5; cp. '^inute for RV. asJiute 
in st 4- The three hymns AV. 6. 27 — 29 represent RV. 10. 165 with inter- 
polations and corruptions: AV. 27. 3^^ is metrically inferior to RV. 3"==; AV. 
29. to RV. 4 (g}d in AV. is superfluous); AV. 28. has prd paddt pdihi- 
sjha^ for RV, 5^^, prd patdt pdtisthabx the false accent of AV, pdthisthali (it 
should be pathi-sthaJj.^ if it meant ‘standing upon the road’) betrays the se- 
condary character of the Atharvan version; cp. also AV. 28. sainkb hay ante ^ 

popular, for RV. 5^^ samyopayanto^ hieratic, which are illustrated interestingly 
.by the relation of AV. 12. i. 29^ (7^) to Kaus. 71. 19 {lup). In AV, 6.92.3*^ 
dhdimiu for dhdtu^ RV. 10. 56. 2^ is a sign of secondary adaptation: the 
Atharvan version is part of a charm to endow a horse with swiftness. AV. 
7, 39, as compared with RV. i, 164. 52; TS. 3. r. ir. 3 (cp. also Supama- 
khyana 17.4), is secondary in it readings, and in pada d exhibits adaptation 
to a practical purpose. The pada, AV. 7, 89. (10. ‘5. 46^), apa divyd 

aedyisam^ is scarcely to be recognized as the opening of that well-known 
stanza which begins in other Vedic texts (RV. i, 23. 23^ et al.) with the 
padas, dpo (or, apd) adydm aedrisam^ qpo anv mdrisam*. there can be 
no doubt about the secondary character of the AV. reading. In AV. 7.91.1'^ 
7 iali is metrically superfluous, and wanting in all ' other versions of the st, 
RV. 6- 47. 12; ro. 131. 6; AV. 20. 125. 51, etc. The st AV. 7. 97, 2 is full 
of changes from the hieratic to popular diction as compared with RV. 5.42.4, 



IL The A.-V. in the School of Saun aka. — C. Relation to other Collections. 49 


and partly also with the Yajur- versions (VS. 8. 15, et al.) : no for no) nesa for 
ficsi \ harivan for harivah ; svastyd for svasti ; cp. also the corrupt brahmandm 
in pada c, assimilated to devdndm in pada d, for the correct brakmand of 
the parallel texts. AV.8. 7. 28 is a secondary working over of RV. 10. 97. 16, 
notwithstanding that AV. has in pada d the more hieratic vis 7 'as 7 ?idd for RV. 
sarvasmdd. To these examples may be added those pointed out by Olden- 
BERG; especially from the 14^^ and 18*^ books of the AV.^: they also show 
the constant removal of theAtharvan stanzas from the more archaic hieratic 
form and thought sphere to the plainer habits of speech and thought of the 
people. Of especial significance for the chronology of the AV. seem to me 
to be certain cases in which that Veda employs one or more stanzas that 
coincide with the RV. as a theme which is expanded or beaten out, either 
into several stanzas, or into an entire hymn. Thus the two sts. AV. 1.19.3, 4 
seem to be nothing more than RV. 6. 75. 19 spun out, and rendered more 
typically Atharvanic by introducing Rudra and his arrows. AV. i. 22 cor- 
responds in its first and fourth stanzas to RV. i. 50. 1 1, 12: the interior stanzas, 
absolutely original, seem to modulate and expand the theme set by sts. i 
and 4. Similarly AV. 3. 24. i == 10. 17. 14 fet al.) looks as though it had 
been picked out as the theme which a later poet might fitly develop into a 
song of the harvest. Again AV^. 14. 2. 17, representing RV. 10. 85. 44, is 
followed by the similar st. 1 8 which is original with the Atharvanist, is linked 
verbally with 17, but does not add anything of consequence to the thought. 
A diaskeuastic performance like AV. 7. 50 in which the anustubh stanzas are 
original, the tristubhs common property, with distinct signs of adaptation to 
the aim in hand (gambling-charm), lends support to such analyses. The force 
of these necessarily subjective observations is increased a good deal by the 
unquestionable fact that the AV. handles stanzas seemingly original in the 
Yajus-Samhitas in the same way, the most notable instances being the two 
chains of hymns 2. 19 — 23, and 4. 23 — 29 (the so-called wr^iim-hymns). See 
below,- S 45. 

S 44. Traces of superior tradition in the AV. as compared 
with the RV. — As regards direct evidence that the AV. reaches in some 
respects behind the tradition of the RV. to that floating mass of mantra- 
materials from which all redactions flowed, it must be admitted to be weak 
in force in comparison with the evidence just presented. Bergaigne and 
Oldenberg have assumed that such evidence may be gathered from certain 
groupings of stanzas, and arrangements of hymns in bothVedic schools, and 
we have felt compelled, without denying the possible force of their observ- 
ations, to suspend judgment upon them, at least until the evidence of the 
Paippalada is in^". Such inferences as may be gathered from the metres, 
sense, and linguistic forms are rarely of such a nature as to prove the silperior 
tradition of the AV*. Occasional instances like* AV. krdhi for RV. Zwi/; AV. 
viiva for RV. sarva^ noted above, are almost forceless. An archaism (attrac- 
tion) such as is contained in AV. 14. i. 46*^, mayalj. patibkyo janaye pariwaje, 
where RV, 10. 40. 10^ reads janayah, looks a little affected, because the 
plural to match patibhyo seems really to be demanded by the sense, and the 
general form of the obscure , stanza seems more trustworthy in RV. than AV. 
In AV. 6. 27. 3^ the form dstfi (padap. astrJiti)^ for dspydm^ RV. 10, 165.3, 
is an archaic locative (Ath. Prat. I 74) which seems to indicate a certain 
superiority of the Atharvan text: this is, however, not borne out by padas 
2^ and 3*^ whose Rigvedic form is metrically preferable. Again AV. 8* 3. 7*^, 
utdrahdhdn sfnmhi jdtaveda utdrebhdndm r 0 bhir ydtu^Mndn^ as compared 
with RV. 10.87.7^^, utdlabdham sprimhi jdiaveda alSkandd rstibkir ydiu- 

In Ja-Aryan Research. II, 1 b. 



50 IL Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


dhdnaf^ contains twice the ^old' form rahh where the RV. has late' iabh^ but 
pada b is metricaliy superior in RV., and the sense of the RV. is also more 
compact (see Ludwig’s translation, nr. 430). Less assailable is the superiority 
of the reading AV, 3. i. 4*^, visvaksaiyam krnnhi cittam esdm^ deprive their 
schemes of fulfilment’, for the senseless version, RV. 3, 30. 6^, visvam satyam 
krnuhi vistam astu^ even though pada a in RV. is distinctly superior to AV.*h 
And so the reading avisvavinndm^ in contrast to visvavidam^ AV. 9. 9. lo'^, 
is not only superior to avisvamiiwdm^ RV. i. 164. 10: it is of the kind 
that cannot be explained as due to later correction, but represents the original 
tradition of the stanza Cp. also parkkrid^ AV. 14. i. 7^, \>tiitxihdXkpariskrtam^ 
RV. 10. 85. 6^; jandm am, AV. 14. 2. 10^, for the senseless jandd anu, RV. 10. 
85.*3i’^. Occasionally, too, there are to be found here, as in the inter-relation of 
all Sarphitas, independent variants whose language and general impression seems 
equally good in both sources. Thus the little hymn AV. 6. 2 is related to 
RV. 7, 32, 6, 8, but its character is so independent and archaic, as- to suggest 
original workmanship of no mean quality and age. Or the subtle modulation 
of RV. 6. II. 4 (MS. 4. 14. 15) in AV. 3. 3, i, in spite of certain adaptive 
traits in AV. {amu 7 n naya, in pada d), is not easily accounted for as a working 
over of the RV. form; it represents rather an independent effort in the sarpe 
sphere of ideas, whose language and date as compared with RV, cannot be 
said to be inferior. And there are, of course, throughout the AV., hymns 
and stanzas of a totally independent character that suggest very old work- 
manship, not only such as are of purely Atharvanic character and popular 
diction, but such as are written in good hieratic language. Thus the hymn 
to the battle-drum, 5. 20, may be later than the oldest parts of the RV., 
but there is in it nothing that suggests late composition, later, e. g., than 
the stanzas addressed to the drum, RV, 6. 47. 29 — 31 (AV. 6. 126, et al). 
Or the- language of the theosophic hymn 5. i, which is original with the 
exception of stanza 6 ===== RV. i o. 5. 6, is not of such a character as to justify 
the belief that a later versifex might have so completely immersed himself 
in the style and mode of thought of the early Rishis as to be able to pro- 
duce stanzas as good — or as bad, according to the point of view, Cf. 
also such a hymn as 6. 61. On the whole therefore the AV. is the bearer 
of old tradition not only in the line of the popular charms; but also to some 
extent, albeit slight, its hieratic materials are likely to be the product of 
independent tradition that has eluded the collectors of the other Vedas, the 
RV. not excepted 

1 Cp. JAOS, XV, p. CLXXii. 2 Cp. ibid., p. CLXXiu ff. — 3 See below, $ 62. 
— 4 Cp. Whitney’s tables, IS. 11. 347, — s kvaydmi is Avestan zbayimi\ for the 
dissyllabic roots in u see Bloomfield, JAOS. XVI, p. CLvmff.; BB, XXIIL 107 If.; 
panihmam is Avestan paManem ; sarva is Avestan haurva, etc. ; rajju is not separable 
from Lith. rez^h * braid’. Cp. Hillebrandt, GGA. 1889, p, 401 : Bloomfield, JAOS. 
XVII, p. 175, note 5.-6 For the literature on this subject see Arnold, JAOS. 
XVIII. 204 ff. ; cp, Roth, Abhandlung, p. 22 if. — 7 aiho at the beginning of padas 
is a favorite Atharvan expression. ^ Cp. SBE. XLIL 353. — 9 3 Die Hymnen des 
RigfVeda, p. 320 ff, — 10 See above g 36. — 1* SBE. XLIL 326. — - Oldenberg, 
1. 0,323, following Ludwig, V, 447. •— *3 Cp. Hillebrandt, GGA. 18S9, p. 40411 

S 45. Adaptation and expansion of Yajus-themes for Athar* 
vanic purposes. — The preceding analysis of the relation of the AV.- to 
the RV. hasKbeen on the whole in the nature of support to existing views 
on the subject: it does npt seem at all likely that these will ever be materially 
changed. As regards the relation of the AV. to the Yajus-Sarphitas the im- 
pression exists among scholars — to what extent it is not easy to say, because 
of the absence of definitive statements — that the AV. is entitled to a prior 



IL The A.-V. in the School of Saunaka. — C. Relation to other Collections. 5 1 

position and date of final redaction as compared with the collections of 
■ mantras in the YV. Such a view, if it exists at alP, is not sustained by the 
facts in the case: on the contrary an extended comparison of the two classes 
goes to show that the redaction of the AV. holds much the same place 
compared with the redactions of the YV. as \vhen compared with the RV. 
The materials common to the two Vedas appeat in the main in better form 
and more original application in the Yajus than in the AV.; the special habit 
of the AV. to adapt and to group stanzas for secondary purposes is fully 

in evidence. Here again the Atharvan redactors may, in fact are likely to 

have gathered up some materials that escaped the scrutiny of the Yajus- 
redactors, or that had passed out of active use before the conclusion of these 
redactions, but the Atharvan redactiqn cannot well be assumed to have pre- 
ceded the Yajus. The best evidence for this is not so much the general 
superiority of the readings of the' Yajus as certain drastic methods by which 
the AV. forces purely liturgical stanzas into its own service of low folk-lore 
and witch- craft. The Atharvan in such cases has not in view incidental 
features of larger aims and performances, as is the case with the sorcery 
stanzas and -formulas of the Yajus, but it makes the Yajus-stanzas in question 
the basis of an independent, self-centred act of the usual Atharv^ic sort 
It will be worth while to dwell in detail upon a few cases of this kind by 
way of establishing the presumption that this habit exists in the AV. on a 
larger scale. 

In MS. I. 5. 2; ApS. 6. 21. I we have five formulas addressed to Agni 

in which he is implored to attack with his manifold fiery qualities ‘him that 

hates us and whom we hate\ These same five formulas appear AV. 2. xgj: 
but this is followed ' by four other hymns in which Vayu, Surya, Candra, ai 0 ’ 
Apah (th^ waters) are addressed in the same terms. To speak of t^e fiery^, 
qualities, fa^as^ haraSy arcis^ sods, tejas^ of Vayu or the waters is of cotifSe) 
possible in the course of the development of the later liturgic litanies, wh^ i 
everything is possible on a pinch. Yet it may not be doubted that 
restriction in the /r^w/^x-texts of these five appeals to Agni marks the origfti^ 
status: out of this the AV. has developed a formidable pentad in the secoM 
degree (25 formulas) which are prescribed, correctly no doubt, Kaus. 47, ^ 
the introductory oblations in ^;/^ir^i-^-practices (hostile sorcery). But further, 
the pentad of divinities is most characteristically Atharvanic. Whereas the 
Brahmanical texts in general present times without end a cosmic-Vedic triad: 
Agni-PrthivT-Rigveda, etc.; Vayu-Antariksa-Yajurveda, etc., Surya-Dyu-Samaveda, 
etc., the Atharvan writings, craving a costnic base for their Veda, expand this 
into a tetrad or pentad, by the addition of Candramas, or Candramas and 
the waters^: Kaui 119. 2, .3; GB. i. i. 17—20, 29; 2. 16, 24; 3. 24, etc. 
There can be no doubt that the old fire-formulas were an original stock of 
Yajus, and that the AV. has expanded them to accord with notions of its own 
whose date cannot have been as early as that of the existing Yajus.-collectiotts. 

Closely and characteristically similar is the history of the so-called 
mrgdra-suktani^ AV. 4. 23 — 29^. In the first place we may note'* that this 
litany consists of seven hymns of seven stanzas each, i. e., a heptad in the 
second degree; this numerical symmetry, in itself suspicious, points to second- 
ary handling, - just as in the preceding pentads. The entire litany aims,- as 
its refrain-padas clearly show, to drive out calamity {mm amhasah). The 
structure of these hymns is as follovvs: barring 4.28, the first and last stanza 
of each hymn consists of Yajur-mantras which are employed in the Yajus- 
saiphitas zs ydjy&j^rmuvdky&s, TS. 4, 7- 15; MS. 3. 16. 5; KS. 22. 15; on the 
other hand the intervening stanzas in the AV. are in the main original. Now 



5 2 11. Literature and History, i b. Atharva-V eda and Gopath a-Brahman a. 

it were possible to imagine that the Yajus-stanzas were picked out of longer 
hymns, though there is no special reason for such a supposition. That they 
were not gathered from the Atharvan hymns in question ma}' be regarded 
as certain: why should the choice have fallen every time upon stanzas i and 7? 
More important, nay conclusive, however, is the fact that the intervening 
stanzas {2 — 6) in the AV. are obviously secondary padding. This may be 
seen best in 4, 29: stanzas i and 7 are of ordinary mantra-character, praising 
Mitra and Varuna in language that does not arrest attention. Stanza 2, on 
the other hand, in its first hemistich chews over padas b and d of stanza i, 
adding nothing but the beginning of a list of old Rishis whom Mitra and 
Varuna are supposed to have helped out of difficulties in the days of yore: 
they are the traditional worthies Babhru, Afigiras, Agasti, Jamadagni, Atri, 
etc. The dulness of the epigonal author betrays itself throughout: in stanzas 
3 and 4 he repeats Atri’s name, the whole is veritable clap-trap. It will 
not require close inspection of the intermediate stanzas of the remaining 
Inmns to convince one that there also the outer stanzas are the ‘leitmotiv’, 
the rest the muse of a late author who relies in the main upon his own 
mediocrity, but occasionally gathers in some existing mantra or pada. On 
the other hand the one altogether original hymn of the series, 4. 28, is 
addressed to Bhava and Sarva: these popular divinities must not be wanting 
in the AV. in any continuous invitation of ;7mV-character, addressed to the 
Vedic pantheon (cf. AV. ii. 2). Along with its originality 4. 28 e.xhibits also 
its particular Atharvanic character {Jiriydkrt and nndakrt in stanza 6 ; kiniidin 
in stanza 7): the hymn is clearly an intruder in the sphere of ideas from 
which these wr^-<znz-stanzas are derived, lending itself conveniently to the 
building out of the numerical scheme, as well as to the Atharvanic idea of 
the proper way of making an exhaustive appeal to the most important members 
of the pantheon of that time. ^ 

We may in fact safely present the statement as the outcome of the 
preceding analysis, that the AY. handles the prose formulas of the YV. in a 
decidedly secondary fashion, and that both Yajus-formulas and Yajus-stanzas 
are frequently used as themes to which the Atharvanist has added new matter 
to suit his own devices. For instance 10. 5 is an incantation to the waters, 
being a' long and weary litany, partly in V’'ajus-prose, partly in poor metre. 
In it occur as themes that are beaten out beyond endurance such formulas 
as, indrasyauja stha (VS. 37. 6), or visnoJi kramo Yi (TS. 4. 2. i). There is 
not the slightest chance that these formulas were borrowed by the YV. from 
the AV., nor can there be am^ doubt that the AV. got hold of these themes 
at a time when they were already perfectly familiar in their liturgical applic- 
ation to special acts of the -sacrifice. Similary AV. 5, 24 is an over- 

long litany engaging the help of the pantheon, as^nin hrahmany asmin kar- 
maiiy asydm purod/idydm etc.: according to, Kaus, 17.30 the piece is recited 
on entering upon the duties of the piro/ntij a rather secondary and Athitr- 
vanic restriction. Anyhow, the Atharvanic handling of this thenie is secondary 
to that of the YV.: TS. 3. 4. 5j MS. 2. 6. 6 ; TB. 3. ii. 4; SS. 4. 10, i — 3; 
PG. 1. 5. 10; HG. I. 3* TO, 11; if nothing else, asmin iira/imany of the AV., 
as against asmin dra/imann of the YV., points to later redaction and the 
passage out of the hieratic sphere to the popular. Similarly a prose hymn 
like AV. 2. 17, consisting of formulas of the type, ajo b/, oJa me dd/^ 
presupposes existing Yajms-formulas, developed into a litany for specific pur- 
poses; cf. VS, 19. 9: TB. 2, 6. I. 5, etc. As regards the use of one or two 
Yajus-stanzas as a theme for an entire hymn there are quite a number of 
unquestionable cases. Thus AV. i. 31 begins with the well-known stanza, 



ILTheA.-V.intheSchool ofSaunaka. — CRelationto other Collections. 53 

dsdndm dsdpdlebhyah^ TB. 2. 5. 3. 3; 3. 7. 5. 8; AS. 2. 10. 18; ApS. 4. ii. i, 
etc.j but the remaining stanzas of the hymn do not occur outside of AV. 
One needs but look at the stanza 2^^ to eliminate the possibility that the 
YV. borrowed its stanzas from the AV: it is the latter that beats out the 
theme of the first stanza in good stupid Atharvan fashion. And the others 
are no better: the case is most convincing. Similar^ though not quite so 
certain, is the structure of AV. i. 35, addressed to the ddhdja/ja~ 3 imu]et: the 
first two stanzas occur VS. 34. 51, 52; E.V. Khila 10. 128. 8, 9; the last two 
.are original, except that 4^^^^ is formulaic (AV. 8. 2* 21). Here also it would 
seem as though the Atharvanist had borrowed an existing theme in order 
to build up a more substantial hymn suitable to his own devices. Again AV. 
3. 19. begins with a stanza that occurs also VS. ii. 81; TS. 4. i. 10. 3; MS. 
2, 7. 7 (et ah), followed in the sequel, stanza 3"=^^, by two padas that repre- 
sent the continuation of the Yajus-texts. The very mixed character of the 
Atharvan stanzas makes at once for the supposition that the hymn is a 
mere elaboration of a pair of well-connected Yajus-stanzas: stanza 2 is hack- 
neyed; stanza 3^^ substitutes a tristubh, wiiose metre disturbs, and whose 
tone is secondarily Atharvanic, for the regular anustubh Yajus-padas; above 
all the introduction of idam in pada which makes the pada falsely regular, 

ending in and changes the sense {idam brahma ‘this, charm’, for 

brahma ‘brahmanhood’) — all these points are well accounted for if we regard 
the AV. hymn as a compilation, with the Yajus-stanzas as the* main motive; 
it would be a total perversion to assume that the Yajus-texts selected and 
varied the two stanzas i and 3. The same kind of theory is applicable 
to AV.. 6. 62 whose first stanza === MS. 3. ii. 10; TB. i. 4. 8. 3, may have 
served as the theme: the , other two stanzas seem to occur nowhere else, 
and they are not of such a kind as to exclude the notion of late origin by 
way of variations to the theme, even though they fall very well into the tone 
of the hieratic language. Or again, AV. 7. 20 begins with two anustubh stanzas 
that are familiar in the Yajus, TS. 3. 3. ii; MS. 3. 16. 4; the hymn continues 
with four tristubh stanzas that are original. Again it would seem as though 
the Yajus-stanzas were the theme: the variant mama in AV. for mayah 
of the Yajus favors the assumption. A little different is the case of AV. 1.20 
and 21, two battle-charms which are built up in the main upon mantra-stock 
that occurs also RV. 10.152. The circumstances are as follows: the two 
hymns making together 8 stanzas coincide in their last 5 stanzas with the 
RV. hymn. The first three stanzas are patchwork, stanza i ~ TB, 3. 7. 5. 12; 
ApS. 2. 20. 6; stanza 2 « AS. 5. 3. 22; one can not say here exactly that 
the first stanza is the theme of the entire hymn, but certainly when the 
Atharvan compilation took place its first stanza existed as a Yajus: Avhence- 
soever the Yajus-text derived it, it was not borrowed from Atharvan sources; 
the reverse is altogether more likely. 

% 46. The various readings of the AV. and the Yajus-Sarn- 
hitas. — Extensive comparison of the readings of AV. as compared with the 
Yajus show the former to be on the whole inferior to the latter: the tradition 
of the AV. is less pure in every way. The metres are more irregtilar, the 
grammatical forms and constructions less intelligible, the adaptive touches 
very frequent. Thus AV. 2. 6. recurs VS. 27. iff.; TS. 4. i. 7. i ffi; MS. 2. 
12. 5, on the whole with insignificant variants, until we arrive at st 4. Here 
AV. has in the middle of a tristubh the non-descript pada c, sajatdndm 
madhymnesjha^ for which MS. has, sajatdndm madhyamesjheydya, in good metre 
and excellent sense; the AV., in addition to the metrical irregularity, ‘ places 
madkyamesthah into agreement with Agni whom it does not fit nearly as 



54 n. Literature and History, i b. Ath arva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahman a. 


well as the person making the prayer: it is he that wishes to stand (superior) 
in the midst of his rivals. The other Yajur-versions have sa/dfamim /nad/iva^ 
mastha edki which is also possible metre, though not absolutely convincing; 
pada b is superior in all the Yajus. In AY. 2. 28. 5^ naya for krdhl of all 
other versions marks the popular strain: see, TS. 2. 3. 10. 3; MS. 2. 3. 4; 
TB. 2. 7. 7. 5; TA. 2. 5. I. The st. AY. 2. 29. 3, quoted Vait 22. 16, is 
repeated with variants MS. 4. 12. 3; KS. 5. 2; TS. 3. 2. 8. 5; KS. 10. 5. 3. 
In all these the difficult duals dhattam and sacetasmi are replaced by singulars, 
dadhdtu and savarcasmi (KS. suvarcasam)\ and they all regard dsir as the 
nom. sg. of the stem dsir 'milk added to soma’; see especially Yait and 
KS. {asirain). This construction fails in the AY, where dslr is the nom. sg. 
of asis 'prayer’. The dual dhattam in pada b seems to refer proleptically 
to dydvaprthivi in st 4, as Srqmna assumes unliesitatingly. Note also saupra- 
jdstmm (AY.) for suprajdstvam (YV.); the former is a monstrosity. The entire 
st of AY. is adapted secondarily to two persons who are engaged in the 
practice of transmitting disease one from the other: the Yajur-version has 
nothing of the kind, and its originality is not to be doubted'^. In AY. 2. 34. i, 
ya lie pasupati/i pas mam is metrically inferior to yesdm Ise^ TS. 3. i. 4. i, 
as also in st 2, pramuhcanto bhuvatiasya reto^ to TS., pramuhcamdnah etc. 
AY. 3. 13 adapts a number of fanciful stanzas to the practice of conducting 
a river into a new channel: the first six sts. recur in TS. 5. 6. i. 2 — 4; MS. 
2. 13. I in connection with certain oblations of water (hmhhestahdh^ ot apdm 
^rahd/i)^ being evidently at home in the Yajur-ritual. As frequently elsewhere 
in the AY., the body of the 'hymn is mere ornamentation or solemn verbiage, 
the seventh and last st. is original, turning forth the point of the hymn and 
the practice. Accordingly pada 5'^, /jzd prdnena sa/id varcasd garnet^ a 
jagati in the midst of tri.stubhs, is more modern and inferior to d md prdmna 
saha mrcasd gan ivarcasdgan) of the Yajus. The version of AY. 3. 14. 2,3 
seems inferior to that of MS. 4. 2. 10, where the gayatri-form instead of the 
anu^tubhs of AY, ■ and sundry readings, posd for pdsd^ avihmtdii for ahib/iyn* 
01, and puminJ/i for kansimk, make a better impression. No hymn illu- 
strates better the impurity, one might say the stupidity, of the rendering ofYajus- 
material in the AY, than the 5. 27, which is repeated in all Yajus- 

samhitas, YS. 27, ii — 22; TS. 4. i. 8; MS. 2. 12. 6; KS. 18. 17; KapS. 29.5. 
Whereas these texts agree in the main, the Atharvan version is verbally and 
metrically so corrupt as to be scarcely translatable. Notably the first pada 
of the second st appears in the AY. as the fourth pada of the first st., thus 
depriving the second st of its necessary i^^rJ-divinity, tanunapdt, and over- 
loading st I with two, samidh and tanundpdt\ sts. 10 -—12 are mere hodge- 
podge as regards metrical arrangement The version of AY. 6. 38 in TB. 2. 
7. 7. I presents on the whole more primary readings in TB.: dgan for etu in 
the refrain; krandye for vdje in 4^, the former being the archaic kdia diffi- 
ciiior, and in close pai’allelism to mdyau; AY. 2^, tm0 apsu g^m yd puru- 
sysM, is an obvious verbal and metrical corruption as compared with TB.J 
tvisir asvem purusesu gosu: to be sure contrariwise AY. 4^, rdjank seems 
better than yd rajanye of TB. The sense and the wording of AY, 6, 74. 3 
is inferior to TS. 2. 4. ii. 3: the entire AY. hymn is patchwork; especially 
exhibits the usual adaptive touches, to make the st directly and pract- 
ically serviceable. AY. 6. 98. 3*^ reads, prdcyd disas itmn 'indrdsi rdjok- 
dJcyd diso vrtraham chatruho V, for TS. 2* 4. 14, i; MS. 4. 12, 2, prucydm 
disi tvmn indrdsi rdjotodlcydiii mirahan tndrahdsh not only is ^dih in AY., 
pada b, metrically superfluous, but the AY. version is altogether slipshod. 
AY, 7. 3. svayd tanvd tanvam airayat, is a miserable pada in a tri^tubh 



IL The A.-V. in the School of Saunaka. — C Relation to other Collections. 5 5 

St: all other versions, TS. i, 7. 12. 2; MS. i. 10. 3; AS. 2. 19. 32; SS. 3. 17. i; 
KS. 25. 6. 10, are better. In AV. 7. 4, szi/iiite is inferior to svabimte of all 
other versions, and especially viyugbhir^ in the. sense of ‘unhitching’, replacing 
niyiidbJiir^ and coined for the nonce to match vi munca^ exhibits the stanza 
in a corrupt and adapted form: see VS. 27. 33; MS. 4. 6. 2; SB. 4. 4. i. 15; 
TA. I. II. 8; AS. 5. 18. 5; SS. 8. 3. 10. In the tristubh st AV. 7. 6. 2 pida 
b is a jagatl, because AV. has substituted popular havdmalie for hieratic 
fmzfema of all other versions: VS. 21. 5; TS. i. 5. ii. 5; MS. 4. 10. i; AS. 2. 
I. 29; SS. 2. 2. 14. The fondness of the AV. for havdmahe in place of 
huTema has beguiled it elsewhere into the same irregular proceeding: e. g, in 
7. 40. i'^, compared with TS. 3. i. ii. 3; MS. 4. 10. i (cp. also RV. i. 164. 
52*^); or, compare AV. 7. 63. i^, iikthair havmnahe paramdt .sadhastat^ with 
the parallel padas, agnim huverna etc., TA. 10. 2. i (68)^, and ugram huvema 
etc., Mahanarayana Up. 6. 6.^. In AV. 7. 14 2^ the reading krpdt of both 
published editions and the mss. in samhita and padapatha is nonsensical: 
Sayana reads and comments upon krpd in accordance with all the other 
numerous versions, SV. i.,464; VS. 4/, 25; VSK. 4. 8. 3; TS. i. 2. 6. i; MS. 
1. 2. 5; SB. 3. 3. 2. 12; AS. 4. 6. 3; SS. 5. 9. 7. The cfomparison of AV. 7.15 
with the parallel versions, MS. 2. 10. 6, et al, reveals secondary readings and 
adaptation in AV.; in 7. 16 the \\V. reads vardhaya iox bo dhay a of the other 
texts (MS. 2. 12. 5, etal), and to bodhaya^ curiously enough, the ritual, Kaus. 
59. 18; Vait, 5. 9, responds with its verb bod/iayati^; in AV. 7. 47. i^ suhavd 
is inferior to suhavam of the other versions, MS. 4. 12. 6; et al. That the 
AV. version of the r(?/^//^-stanzas at the beginning of book 13 is inferior to 
that of TB. 2. 5. 2, and the result of adaptation has been shown by the writer, 
Contributions, Fourth Series, ' AJPh. xn. 430 fF. 

S 47. The various readings of the AV. and the Srautasutras. — 
The comparisons just stated have shown incidentally that the mantras in the 
Srauta-sutras share in general the superiority of the Yajus-samhitas as com- 
pared^ with the AV. ' This seems to. be true also of those cases in which AV. 
and Srauta-sutras present materials of the hieratic quality which do not occur 
in either RV, or Yajus-samhitas. As early as 1856 Roth did not shrink 
from exposing the secondary manipulations and inferior readings of AV. 2. 5 
as compared^ with AS. 6. 3. i^; he might have added, if the text had been 
accessible, SS. 9. 5. 2. The liturgical form of these sts. in the Srauta-sutras, 
manifest from the insertion of secondary phrases, is disregarded and corrupted 
in the AV. to .such an extent that the sts. are in reality untranslatable in its 
version. A detailed comparison of AV. 6. i with AS. 8. i. 18 (« SV. i. 177; 
AB. 5. 13.8) exhibits the little hymn in what may be regarded as at least a more 
original form in AS. both in sense and metre. The hymn begins AS., doso 
agdd hr had gay ‘now evening hath arrived, sing thou merrily’; for this AV. 
reads, doso gdya brkad gdya^ ‘now sing in the evening, sing thou merrily’ : 
the .first gdya seems a mere repetition of the second. Pada 2^ in tam 
u sjuhy aktaJ}sindhum, is corrupted metrically in AV., tam. u sjuhi yo anta^ 
sindhau; and pada 3^ in AS,, savisad vasupatiki is also more trustworthy than 
AV,, savisad amrtdni hhurl Again AV.^ 6.33 whose first two sts. are scarcely 
translatable in our version appears SS. 18. 3. 2 in a form which at least 
makes a show of intelligibility; cf. also AA. 5. 2. i. 2 — 4; ArS. i. 3. Similarly 
compare AV, 6. 35 with A.S. 8. ii. 4; SS. 10. 9. 17, especially the senseless 
pada 2*=, agnir ukthew amhasw, with, agnir ukthena vdhasd of the Srauta- 
texts. The distinction between hieratic and popular manixas is to be 
observed here as elsewhere: we may expect popular stanzas in as gpod or 
better form in the Ay.; see especially the parallels between ApS. and 



5 6 II. Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Got ai h a- 12 r ahmana. 

AV. grouped together above, $ 41; or cf. the corrupt version of AV, 10, 3. 5 
in TA. 6. 9. 2. 

§48. Traces of superior tradition in the AV. as compared 
with the Yajus-texts. — Here and there, but rarely, the AV. seems to 
present superior readings; more frequently, the Atharvan readings seem no 
better and no worse than those of the Yajus-texts. Pischel" has made out 
a good case for the superiority of AV. 6. 22. 3 over TS. 3. i. ii. 7: especially 
pada b in AV. is superior to TS. which seems to be borrowed from RV. 
5. 58. 3. In AV. 3. 4. 2 the first pada, fi'dm viso vrnatdm nyydya, is almost 
certainly superior to the adapted, ivdm gave \Tnaia rdjydya^ TS. 3. 3. 9. 2 ; 
MS. 2. 5. 10, although the Yajur-version of the remaining padas is at least as 
good as the Atharvan. In- AV. 6. 5. 3^ krnmo is an instance of an occasional 
hieratic form for popular kurmo of the Yajus (VS. 17. 52; TS. 4. i. i. 

MS. 2. 10. 4^), but this instance of superiority is at once reduced to the 
proper proportion on observing that pada 2^ in AV., jwdtave jarase naya, 
is immetrical, and the result of adaptation to ^iwr^r-purposes, as compared 
with the Yajiis-pada, sajdidndffi asad vail, AV. 2. 10, notwithstanding the 
secondarily introduced refrain, is based upon a quite as good or better source 
than TB. 2. 5. 6. i ff.: see padas 3^, and pada 2^, sam somah sa/iausa- 
which is also better than TB., sam dydvdprtinvi sahausadlubmlii in 
the latter dydvdpriAm is out of keeping, borrowed from the preceding stanza, 
apparently to equalize the metre. AV. 3. 10. i impresses one as at least 
as good as its parallel, TS. 4. 3. ii. 5; in fact duhdm in pada 3 is an archaism 
as compared with dhuksya in TS. Nevertheless the entire hymn in the AV. 
is a mixtuin compositum, as may be seen especially in st. 7 which consists 
of an original gay atrl- pada, followed by a rather formulaic, imitative tristubh- 
pada^, and concludes with a common anu§tubh-hemistich (VS. 3. 49; TS, i, 
8. 4. i; MS. I. 10. 2). Instances in which the quality of the readings seems 
equally good as those of the Yajus are AV. 6. 47. i, as compared with TS. 
3. I. 9. i ; KS. 9. 3. 21 (MS. I. 3. 36 is inferior); or AV. 6. 55. i, as compared 
with TS. 5. 7. 2. 3, where indeed pada c in AV, is smoother, though probably 
not more original than TS. And in a case like the little hymn AV. 6. 79, 
as compared with TS. 3. 3. 8. 2, it seems equally impossible to establish 
chronological relation on. the ground of the variants. Neither these nor other 
sporadic instances of intelligent handling of mantra-themes are likely ever to 
change the main proposition, namely that the collection and redaction of the 
AV. took place at a time when the main body of Yajus-stanzas and formulas 
were in existence in essentially their present forms and present application. 
The fuller knowledge in the future of the Yajus-tradition likely to come 
especially with the publication of the Kathaka and Kapisthala Samhitas will 
not change this, even granted that here and there an inferior reading regarded 
at present as of Atharvanic origin may in reality have come from a source 
outside of that Veda: in the majority of cases the Atharvan variants of the 
hieratic mantras are original with that Veda . and ' inferior to the tradition of 
the Yajus, no less than to that of the Rig-Veda. 

* Cp. Whitnev, JAOS. XII, p. 3, bottom. — ^ ® In the latter case Caiidramas 
is the divinity, corresponding e. g. to Agni; the waters are the element, corre- 
sponding e. g. to Prthivi. — 3 See below, S 57* 4 Cp. SBE. XIJI. 309. — 

5 Cp. Henry, Le Livre VII, p. 58. — • ^ Abhandhtng fiber den Atharva-Veda, p. 1 1 ff. — 
7 Ved. Stud. L 84 fit. — B Cp. also bnfbff AV. st. 2®, for 7 raya in YV. — 9 Cp. AV. 

' 6. 47 -' 2^; TS. 3. X. '9. 2d, 



III. Contents of the Atharva-Veda in the SaunakIya-School. 


57 


PART III CONTENTS OF THE ATHARVA-VEDA 
IN THE SAUNAKlYA-SCHOOL. 

$ 49. Classification of the hymns. — The classification of a body 
of 731 Vedic hymns is not an altogether easy matter. The question what 
a given hymn is about is not always to be answered in certain tones, even 
in the case of Atharvan hymns, although prayer and action are more closely 
allied in this than in any other Veda. All scholars are agreed now that the 
Sutra of Kausika frequently furnishes valuable hints towards making out the 
situation within which many hymns were conceived, by famishing the mtse- 
en scene^ as it were, of a given hymn; but all scholars are also agreed that 
the Sutra draws in a large measure upon the independent tradition of folk- 
customs and practices in general, interweaving the Atharvan hymns as prayers 
applicable to the situation with more or less fitness. The Atharvan hymns 
themselves, as the hymns of the Veda in general, are open to the charge 
of secondary adaptation of the floating body of Vedic stanzas to purposes 
different from those which were in the mind of the original composers; see 
SBE. XLii, Introduction, p. lxUi ff., and the Index under, ‘adaptation of mantras’. 
In such cases, of course, the Atharvanic view is the one that primarily con- 
cerns the interpreter of the AV. A large number of hymns are hard to 
classify because of the variety of themes and objects presented in them. 
The arrangement of the hymns into ten classes, attempted for the first time 
by the author in his' ‘Hymns of the Atharva-Veda’, SBE. XLII, has upon closer 
inspection proved quite tenable; it is made the basis of the following analysis. 
But in addition the materials that did not come within the scope of that 
volume had to be taken into account here; the result altogether is stated 
under 14 heads: i) Charms to cure diseases and possession by demons 
{bliaisajydni)^ — 2) Prayers for long life and health idyusydni), — 3) Imprec- 
ations against demons, sorcerers, and enemies {abhicdrikani and krtyd^raii- 
harandni). — 4) Channs pertaining to w^omen (sirlkarmd 7 jz), — 5) Charms 
to secure harmony, influence in the assembly, and the like (sdmmanasydni^ 
etc.}. — 6) Charms pertaining to royalty {rdja/zdrzndm), — 7) Prayers and 
imprecations in the interest of Brahmans. — 8) Charms to secure prosperity 
and freedom from danger ipamitkani), — 9) Charms in expiation of sin and 
defilement {prayasciitdnt). — 10) Cosmogonic and theosophic hymns. — 
ii) Ritualistic and general hymns. — 12) The books dealing with individual 
themes (books 13 — 18). — 13) The twentieth book. — 14) The kunidpa- 
hymns. — 

The only complete translation of the AV. is that of the Anglo-Indian scholar 
R. T. H. Griffith, entitled. Hymns of the Atharva Veda (Benares, Lazarus & Co-). 
WHiT^iEV's posthumous translation of the entire collection is going through the 
press, to be published in the Harvard Oriental Series (ed. C. R. Lanman). A large 
number of hymns have been translated by A. Ludwig in the third volume of his 
great work, Ber Rig- Veda, p, 4281!., as also scatteringly through the same volume ; 
cp. the Index to the entire work, vol. VI p. 57 ff. A hundred selected hymns 
were translated by Julius Grill under the heading, *Hunclert Lieder des Atharva- 
Veda’, in the *Programin des Seminars Maulbronif, Tubingen 1879; published in a 
second edition as an independent volume, Tubingen iSSS. About one third of the 
hymns were selected by the, present author for his volume * Hymns of the Atbarva- 
Veda, together with Extracts from the Ritual Books and the CommentariesV SBE, 
XLII (ed. Max Muller). A considerable quantity of Atharvan matter is treated by 
Roth, Abhandlung uber den Athar^-a-Veda, Tubingen 1856; and in the *Festgruss 
an Otto von Bohtlingk ^ p. 95 C ; by J. MuiR in OST. (see the indexes to vols. I, 
IV, and V); by H. Zimmer, Altindisches Leben (see the indexes p. 453b by Scher- 



58 IL Literature and History, i b, Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


MAN, Philosophisclie Hyninen aus cler Rig* und Atharva-Veda-Samhits, p. 41 ff.; 
by Bloomfield, in ‘Seven Hymns of the AV.’, and the six series 'of ‘Contributions 
to the Interpretation of the Veda’ (the places of publication are stated AJIli. XVII, 
p. 399, note); by Paul Deussen, Allgemeine Geschichte der I’hilosophie, vol. I, 
imrt 1; and scatteringly by many authors throughout the Oriental and Philological 
Journals and treatises. Many translations of individual books exist: Books i — 5 
by Weber, IS. IV. 393 ff., Xlll. 129 ff., XVII. 177 ff., XVIIL iff.; book 6, hymns 
1 — 50 by C A. Florene, BB. XII. 249 ff; books 7 — 13 by Victor Henry (Paris, 
Maisonneiive, 1891—96); book 14 by Weber, I.S. V. 195 ff; book 15 by Aufrecht, 
IS. I, 130 IT. ; book iS by Werer, SPAW. 1895, P- Si5ff; 1S96, p. 253 ff — A 
translation of the AV. into Persian is said to have been made by Brahmans for 
the emperor Akbar, but it has not as yet turned up; see Al>u FazPs Aiivi-Akbail 
in Blochmann’s translation, Bibliotheca Indica, 1S6S, p. 105 (a.D. 1575). Cp. Weber, 
SPAW., 1890, p. 787, note. 

S 50. Class I). Charms to cure diseases and possession by 
demons (bhaisajyani). ■ — The medicinal charms of the AV. go by the 
name of hhcsajam ‘remedy^, the healing plant is Mesaj% the waters are bkesajih. 
The term is not restricted altogether to medicine; it includes also exorcism 
of demons^ and approaches closely to the conception of sdnti in distinction 
from abMcdra^ embracing thus everything that comes under negative, defensive, 
pious magic b The derivative bhaisajya occurs neither in RV. nor AV; it 
appears later in connection with the more advanced and technical medicinal 
practices as laid down in the chapters of the Kousika-sutra (25 — 32), 

and found scatteringly in the Brahmanas and Sutras^. The practices there 
involve a more extensive materia medica and more elaborate therapeutics, 
but it is difficult to detine in detail the extent to which |)ractices similar to 

those of the Sutras must be presupposed from the start with the charms of 

the AV. Action of some sort is likely to have accompanied nearly ail of 
them ; fre(|uently otherwise unintelligible statements of the hymn are clarified 
by the practices in the Sutras 3 . At any rate the charms of tl.e ’AV. along 

witli such practices as went with them re]>resent quite the most complete 

account of [Jiimitive medicine preserved in any literature, 'The limited number 
of KAh hymns which deal with the same subjects are of essentially the same 
character and period 1'RV. 10.137, 161, 163; cp. also i. 191; 50; 8. 

91; 10. 57 — 60, and other sporadic utterances). The existence of .such charms 
and practices is guaranteed moreover at least as early as the Indo-Iranian 
(Aryan) period by the stems baesaza and baesazya {mabthra hacsaza^ and 
haesazya\ haoma baesazya)^ and by the ]‘)reeminent position of water and 
plants in all prayers for health and long life-b Adaldkrt Kuhn has pointed 
out some interesting and striking resemblances between Teutonic and Vedic 
medicinal charms, especially in connection with cures for worms and fract* 
ures. These may perhaps be inere anthropological coincidence.s, due to the 
similar mental endowment of the two people.-*. But it is no less likely that 
some of these folk-notions had crystallized in prehistoric times, and that these 
parallels reflect the continuation of a crude Indo-European folk-lore that 
had survived among the Teutons and Hindus. I'he opposite view is now 
ordinarily asserted with a degree of dogmatism not at all warranted by the 
evidence b ' 

The connection of the Atharvanic medical charms with the later Hindu 
medicine of classical times (Ayur-veda) has never failed to impress itself both 
upon the Hindus themselves who regard the Ayur-ve<la as an npaveda (‘after- 
Veda’) of the Atharvan; Western schoiax*s also were not slow to correlate 
the two strata of medical literature — to the advantage of die understanding 
of both. The diagnosis of fever [takman in^ the A\'., jvara in the later 
medicine), especially of intermittent fever; of wasting pulmonary diseases 



III. Contents of the Atharva-Veda in the SaunakTya-School. 59 

{yakmid)^ and of a considerable number of other diseases is almost the same 
in both. The present author has more recently identified the dsrdva of the 
AV. with later atisdra ^diarrhoea'; the apacit of the AV. with later apad 
‘scrofulous sores’, and the Atharvanic disease which is described (AV. 6. 25) 
as 771 any a and skatidhya with the ‘Manskunder’ (also a scrofulous affection), 
as reported upon the basis of the classical Saslras by Wise, Hindu Medicine, 
p. 316^. From the other side the gap between classical and Atharvanic 
medicine, still a wide one, has also narrowed very materially. The early 
views of European scholars as to the fabulous antiquity of the Ayur-veda 
(1000 B. C.) was criticized especially by Haas and Zimmer, but their dispos- 
ition of the chronology of classical medicine seems to have erred almost 
as much in the direction of too great a modernness as the earlier view in 
the direction of an impossible antiquity The recent discovery of the Bower 
ms. exhibits medical science at about the the fifth century A. D. in much the 
same condition and the same degree of development as in the medical Sastras 
of Susruta and Caraka, presupposing an evolution which must have lasted 
some centuries when compared with even the later Atharvanic medicine of 
the Kaurika®. The presence of foreign, especially Greek, influence in Hindu 
medicine has also been assumed on the ground of rather sparse points of 
resemblance 9 , whereas on the other hand the influence of Hindu medicine 
upon early Arabic medicine, and through it upon European medicine in 
general, is guaranteed beyond peradventure. Jolly’s forthcoming elaboration 
of Hindu Medicin in this Encyclopedia will doubtless throw additional light 
on these and kindred questions 

The classification of the medical hymns of the AV. is difficult for vai;ious 
reasons: the meaning of the names of the diseases is often obscure; 
a great variety of unrelated diseases are often grouped ii^ the same 
charm; the line between disease and possession by demons and demoniac 
influences is not drawn sharply; and the curative influences that are employed 
are either of the s\mboiic order, or consist of amulets instead of healing 
sul} 3 tances. These amulets are largely derived from the vegetable kingdom, 
the designation of the plants being again generally quite obscure. Good 
illustrations of the symbolic treatment are offered by the charm to cure 
jaundice (i. 22), and the brief charm takman ‘fever’ (7. 116). In the 

former the yellow color of the patient is sent where it naturally belongs, to 
the yellow sun and yellow birds, the red color of the cow being substituted 
for the yellow; in the latter the hot fever is sent to the cool frog who may 
be supposed to find it enjoyable. On the other hand the Zv/^/Z/iZ-plant that 
is implored to help against fever (5.4; 19.39), or the pepper-corn that is 
employed in the quaint charm against wounds (6. 109) cannot be supposed 
to owe their presence in these surroundings to any real medicinal properties. 
For all that a classification of the hymns yields a picture in vague outline 
of that same Hindu medicine that is treated so bulkily in the Sastras and 
their descendant works. Clearest in exj^ression are the hymns against takman^ 
or fever, the jvara of the later medicine. The word takman does not occur 
outride of the AV. Four hymns, i. 25; 5. 22; 6. 20; and 7.116, are devoted 
to its cure; two others, 5. 4 and 19. 39, are addressed to the plant kustkd 
With special reftrence to the cure of this disease. Just as Susruta designates 
fever a.s ‘the king of diseases’ so the tahnan seems in Atharvanic times to 
Iiave been the most dreaded ailment., Its diagnosis seems to have been fairly 
searching and exact: the chief symptom is the alternation between heat and 
chills; it is intermittent, arriving either every day at the same time, every 
third day, or omitting every third day; and it is accompanied by jaundice which 



6o H. Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


suggests true malarial fever, especially during the rainy season. It is assoc- 
iated with a variety of other diseases, headache, cough, balasa^ tddyugu, 
and jfaman h'tcV (also in the Avesta), the takmatCs ‘brother’s son’. Its most 
salient symptom, heat, suggests Agni ‘fire’ as the cause. It is generally cured 
by prayer and conjuration to which the Kausika adds symbolic practices; 
the plant kustha and the tree jangida furnish amulets against it Once (7. 
1 1 6. 2) the cooling frog is suggested in the mantra, and applied in the 
corresponding practice of the Sutra Closely associated with the takman- 
hymns is i. 12, an interesting charm addressed to lightning (Agni) conceived 
as the cause of fever, headache, ^ and cough To the cure of jaundice, 
frequently mentioned along, with fever, i. 22 is devoted independently; the 
symbolic proceedings indicated above are executed energetically in the pract- 
ices of the Sutra 

The ancient Vedic disease dropsy {jalodara^ ‘water-belly’), the infliction 
of Varu^a in punishment of moral delinquency {anrta)^ is represented by 
three hymns, i. 10; 7. 83; and 6.24. In the latter it seems coupled with 
heart-disease, an instance of good diagnosis. The cure indicated both in the 
hymns and sutras is water which is used symbolically and with a touch of 
homoeopathy Again, in another disease which suggests the presence of 
overabundant humors, water and water-procuring ants (‘piss-ants’) figure as 
the remedy, in the same symbolic-homoeopathic way (attractio similium)* as 
in the case of dropsy. The disease in question, dsrdva, is treated- in i. 2; 
2. 3; and 6. 44; the commentators define it as aiisdra ‘diarrhoea’ which is 
correct in the main, although perhaps excessive micturation and other excessive 
discharges may have been included primarily. One of these charms (i. 2) 
seems to have been originally a battle-charm, adapted by adding st 4 to 
its present use * 5 . Another (6. 44) appeals for help to an object called 
visdnakd^ either a plant or a horn (at any rate with punning intention: vi sd 
‘loosen’)’^. The converse of excessive discharges, namely constipation and 
retention of urine, is cured by i. 3, and i.s accompanied by an interesting 
medical practice in Kaui 25. 10 — 19. A disease whose vague description 
suggests either rheumatism or colic, due to the missiles of Rudra, is driven 
out with S. 90; to this Kaus. 31. 7 adds homoeopathically a spear-amulet to 
counteract the pains that seem as if from* a spear. Diseases of the pul- 
monary order are exorcised in 6. 14, addressed to baldsa^’^^ and to cough 
ikasd) in 6. 105; 7. 107. The terms rdj ay aksma, ajfidtayaksma 

(also fdpayakma in TS.) are in the later medicine applied to pulmonary 
diseases’®; for the Vedic period this definition. seems too narrow: AV. 2. 33 
(RV. ro. 163); 3. II ; 9. 8; 19. 36; 44, etc. point to the more general meaning 
‘wasting disease’, or ‘disease in general’. Very curious and problematic is 
6. 80, accompanying an oblation ihavis in the technical sense: see below, 
S 60, end) to the sun, conceived as one of the two heavenly dogs. In the 
ritual this is treated as a cure for paralysis ipaksakata^ hemiplegia) * 9 . Three 
charms are directed against kseiriya ‘inherited disease’ (2. 8; 10; 3. 7); the 
symptoms of the kseiriya are not described: the disease may have been of 
the^ scrofulous or syphilitic order. Other internal diseases are alluded to 
incidentally, or grouped in the panaceas (sarvabhaisajya of the commentators), 
especially in 2. 33; 9. 8; and 19. 44^ cf. for these Zimmer, p. 578 ff, and the 
item ‘diseases’ in the Index to SBE. XUL 697. 

To the cure of ills of a more external character,, especially skin-diseases, a 
considerable number of charms address themselves. Leprosy (kildsa) is cured 
in I. 23 and 24 by applying black plants, rajdm md-syamd,^ (allopathic sym- 
bolism); abcesses (vidradka) are mentioned with other diseases in 6. 127. i; 



in. Contents of the xAlTHarva-Veda in the SaunakIya-School. 6i 


9. 8. 2 0®-^. Of particular interest are the charms directed against scrofulous 
sores called a^acit (later apact)^ and related diseases: 6.25; 6. 57; 7.74,1,2; 
7. 76. I, 2; 7. 76. 3. Their character was misunderstood prior to the author’s 
essay on this theme The sores, tumors, and pustules apparent in this 
disease are conjured in the hymns themselves to fall off, or fly away, because 
in the naive view of the folk they were supposed to have settled like birds 
upon the afflicted person. The Sutra, however, treats the disease by drastic 
applications, and in' 'one .instance (6. 57) the famous remedy of Rudra, the 
jdlasa (urine), is indicated as the remedy by the mantras themselv^®-. The 
cure of wounds and fractures is accomplished by two hymns (4- 12; 5. 5) 
which appeal to the plant called variously arundhatlj Idksd^ or sildc}\ the 
name arundhatl points towards a punning symbolic connection between the 
disease {ariis Vound’) and the simple. The first of these two hymns has 
been compared by A. Kuhn with the Merseburg charm, and many other 
similar productions from various Teutonic and Slavic sources The pepper- 
corn (pippali) curiously figures in 6. 109 as a cure or preventive of the same 
trouble. Flow of blood is charmed to a stop by the pretty hymn 1. 17 which 
seems (st 4) to indicate the use of a bandage or compress filled with sand^h 
The Brahmanas and Sutras mention types of Vedic lore designated as sarpa- 
vidya and visavidyd ‘science of serpents and of poisons’ These so-called 
sciences similarly to ydiuvidyd^ raksovidya] etc., are referable iri the main to 
the AV. which presents many charms not only to keep serpentb from the 
premises (below, S 57 )? but also for the cure of their poisonous bites. Such 
charms are 5. 13; 5. 16; 6. 12; 7. 56; and 7. 88; of these 5. 13 is of especial 
interest; as containing many words founded upon the bed-rock of folk-lore, 
among others the word tdbuvam which Weber has identified with ‘ taboo’, 
not, however, fiiiling to recognize the attendant difficulties The importance 
of this particular phase of witchcraft is shown by the existence of the Garuda- 
Upani§ad which is nothing more than a charm against snake-bites, put into 
the mouth of Brahman, and elevated to the position of brahmavidyd^K In 
the Bengal Presidency alone the number of deaths from serpents bites in 1876 
amounted to 11416^^. And there are also charms directed against poison 
not derived from serpents, 4.6 (poisonous arrows); 4.7; and 6. 100. In these 
cases water seems to be depended upon as a cure; of especial interest is 
6. 100 ill which the water-producing ants (tipajikd) yield the healing fluid 
The ritual reinforces these poison-charms with appeals to Taksaka (Vaisaleya), 
the serpent-good To the cure of worms {krimi) three charms are devoted: 
2.31 (worms in general); 2.32 (worms in cattle); and 5.33 (worms in 
children). Identical, or similar stanzas appear in many other texts, especially 
TA. and SV. Mantrabrahmai^a: A. Kuhn has shown, that the greatest variety 
of diseases are regarded in the naive view of folk-medicine as due to the 
presence of worms. This accounts for ‘worms in the head’ (2. 31. 4) ‘the 
variegated worm, the four-eyed’ (2, 32. 2), and the like The Sutra presents 
complicated practices. The charm 6. 16, addressed to a substance called 
dhayu^ which Kausika identifles with mustard, is directed against ophthalmia; 
a disease of the eye, alaji^ known in the later medicine^®, is mentioned 
9. 8. 20. In the same hymn and elsewhere diseases of the ear are also 
mentioned (9. 8. i, 2). Three lively, picturesque charms, 6. 21; 136; 137, 
cause hair to grow luxuriantly: ‘With reins they had to be measured, with 
outstretched arms they had to be measured out May thy hair grow as 
reeds, may it (cluster), black, about thy head!’ ( 6 . 137* 3 )- 0 ^® of these 
charms (6.136) is performed with the otherwise unknown plant ‘she 

that takes root’; all three are accompanied in the Sutra by fanciful symbolic 



62 IL Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and GopAXHA-BRAHi^rANA. 


practices. Three charms, 4. 4; 6. 72; and 6. loi, in language not at all 
veiled, profess to promote virility {iepaharsana). 

A maniac Vho, bound and well-secured, loudly jabbers^ is exorcised in 
6. 1 1 1. Insanity is due to possession by demons, especially the mind-bewildering 
Gandharvas and Apsaras-^L At this point especially Atharvanic medicine 
passes over into demonology: the boundary-line between the two is rarely 
well-defined^^. This class of hymns, therefore, is in close contact with those 
treated here in the third category. The rather romantic charm 4. 37 appeals 
to the plant ‘goats-horn’ {ajairngv, comms., memirng\ and vismi) to drive 
Raksas, Apsaras, and Gandharvas out of a possessed person. The choice of 
this particular plant is probably due in part or entirely to its meaning (etymo- 
logical symbolism). Raksas and fits (grd/iz) are driven out in 2. 9 with an 
amulet made from ten different kinds of holy {Mnta) wood; demons and 
diseases in 19. 36 with another composite hundred-fold amulet The last 
three charms have suggested analogies from Teutonic folk-lore Raksas and 
Pisacas are also exorcised in 4. 36 and 6. 32. The plant prMj^arm is con- 
jured, 2. 25, against the demon of disease called kanva^ conceived especially 
as the devourer of the embryo in the womb. Susruta still recommends the 
priniparm as a preventive against miscarriage {garbhasr&vi}^^ , Three charms, 
2. 4; 19. 34; 35, addressed to an amulet derived from the jaftgi 4 a-ixt% are 
directed against diseases and demons. 

At another point the remedial charms pass over by imperceptible degrees 
into the class of the ‘life-giving^ charms {ayusyani) of our second category. 
Special substances, or water and the plants in general, are implored 
for complete exemption from sickness (sarvarogabhaisajya^ i. e., panaceas). 
Thus the 'protect') in 6. 25 ; the plant kuspia in 6. 95; the 

apudru-tiet in 6. 127; bdellium in 19. 38; barley and water in 6. 91; an 
amulet of salve (dnjana) in 19. 44. Or Soma and Rudra are appealed to 
in 7. 42 (RV. 6.74.2,3); Vita, the wind, in 4. 13 (RV.io. 137), the so-called 
/<2^/Ar/|y<2-hymn. Hymns and stanzas addressed to the waters, often not 
original in the AV., are used as panaceas (i. 4—6), or against some special 
disease, e. g., 6. 22, which the Sutra prescribes against dropsy. Plants are 
similarly appealed to in 6. 96, and especially in the long hymn 8. 7 which 
counts upon the virtue of all possible magic and medicinal plants (analogous 
to the so-called osadhi-stuti^ RV. 10. 97). Or, again, a hymn or stanza of 
general character is adapted as a bhaisqfyam, as e, g. 7. 10 (RV. i. 164. 49) 
which is prescribed for a child seized by the demon Jambha (convulsions) 
as it is being nursed by its mother (note the word kana in the st). And 
there are hymns which aim to. secure immunity from all diseases, real or 
fanciful, by simply driving them out by conjuration, naming them one after 
another, until the list is exhausted: 2. 33 (RV. 10. 163 « AV. 20. 96) and 
9. 8 (cp. also 19. 44). We may finally note, 2. 29, a charm for securing long 
life {dyusya), which Kauiay.g— 13 employs in a practice designed to transmil: 
the disease of one seized by thirst ((nmdgr/iJia) upon another person. St. 6 
seems to accord with this transference/ vaguely suggesting modern trans- 
fusion 

Roth, Zur Litteratur and Geschichte de$ Weda, p, 37 ; Grohmaxn, IS. i X; 3S1 C ; 
WL.2, 33 (cp. 283 ff.;; WxBER, Die Griechen in Indien, SFAW,, 1890, p. 924 ff.; 
Ludwig, Der RV., III. 343; Zimmer, p. 374 ff. (cp. Kaegi, Jahrbucher ftir classische 
Philologie, 1880, p. 464 fT-); Bloomfield, SBE. XI II, p. 1—48, and the note? cor-' 
responding; Winternitz, Folk-Medicine in Ancient India, Nature, vol. LVIU, n. ff. 
(July 7, 1898). " 

* This definition touches upon the important division of the Athar.an into two 

Vedas, AthzxY^ma. {santa, and AjigiT 2 ksa, (gbi!>ra^ abbimrika see above, p. 8 ff. ; 



III. Contents of the Atharva-Veda in the SaunakTya-School. 63 


SBE. XUI, p. xvmff.; Hillebrandt, Ritual-Litterafur, p. 169, 177. Good and evil 
magic are distinguished at all times, e. g., in the Mahabharata: Hopkins, JAOS. 
Xlil. 312, 365.^37 the side of this stands the three-fold distinction of the ritualistic 
manuals; abkicarika, saniika, and pan^ka-, see MadhusudanasarasvatI, IS. L 16; 
Bloomfield, Seven Hymns, AJFh. VIL 477; Hillebrandt, ibid. p. 169; cp. Rig- 
vidhsna i. 1. 3, and, Meyer, Introduction, p. xii. — 2 Hillebrandt, 1. c. 181. 
Cp. Meyer, Rig-vidhana, Introduction, jx xiii. — 3 Bloomfield, Seven Hymns, 
AJPh. VIL 467 ff.; Contributions. Second Series, AJPh. XL 320 ff, — 4 See Vend. 
20—22 (especially 20. 4; SBE. IV. 221, note); Spiegel, Die Arische Periode, p. 97, 
^55> ^7^^? 204; Geiger, Civilization of the Eastern Iranians, p, 215 ff. Avestan 
paman = Ved. paman Htch’ is the apparently solitary instance of the identical 
nomenclature of a disease. — 5 A. Kuhn, KZ. XIII, "pp. 49—74, and 113— 157; 
L. V. SCHROEDER, Indien’s Litteratur, p. 175 ff.; SBE. XLII, p. 313, 386, 454; cp, 
Pictet, KZ. V. 337 (antiquated). The use of the frog against fever may also reach 
back to prehistoric beginnings; see Grohmann, IS. IX. 386,414; SBE. XLII. 565 ff.; 
JAOS. XVIL 173. — 6 AJPh. VIL 467 K; XI. 320 ff. — ’ 7 Haas, ZDMG. XXX. 
617 ff,; XXXI. 647 ff.; Zimmer, 374 ff.; WI .2, 286 (and, Naclitrair, p. 13 ff.); L. v. 
SCHROEDER, 1. C. WEBER, SPAW., I89O, p. 924 ff. — 8 HoERNLE, PBAS., 

April 1890; JBAS., 1891, p. 139 ff.; Roth,WZKM, V. 303; BChler, ibid. 102 ff.. ^02 ff.; 
Jolly, Festgruss an Roth, p. 18; WZKM. XL i64fr. — 9 Roth, ZDMG.'xXVL 
448;^ Weber, SPAW., 1890, p. 29. — 10 Connected treatises on classical Hindu 
Medicine: WL.®, p. 283 ff.; v, Schroeder, 1. c. 729 ff* The most convenient digest 
of Hindu Medicine based -upon native literature is still. Wise, Commentary on the 
Hindu System of Medicine 2, i86o (regrettably without an index). For purposes of 
comparison see the list of diseases and plants (many medicinal) in the index of 
SBE. XLII, p. 697 and 702. — Weber, IS. IV. 119* Grohmann, IS. IX. 381 ff.; 
Zimmer, p. 379 ff«; Hardy, Die Vedisch-Bralimanische Periode, p. 198; Bloomfield, 
SBE. XLII, p. 44iff*» cp. Wise, p. 219 ff. — 12 AJPh, VH, p. 469 ff.; SBE. 

XLII 7, 246 ff. — ^3 SBE. XLII. 263 ff. — 14 SBE. XLII. ii ff., 241, 471 562, 
and cp. In<iex, under ‘attractio similium’, and, ‘homceopathv’. — 15 SBE, XLII. 
233 (cp. AJPh. VIL 467). — AJPh. XII. 426 ff.; SBE. XLIL 481. — H SBE. 
XLII. 450 shows that the exact nature of balasa is not defined by the texts. — 
18 Wise, p. 210, 321 ff.; Grohmann, IS. IX. 400; Zimmer, p. 376 ff. — 19 JAOS. 
XV. 163 ff.; SBE. XLII. 500 ff, — ^ Zimmer, p. 386; Wise, p. 210. — 21 Con- 
tributions. Second Series, AJPh. XI. 320 ff. Cp. the commentary on these stanzas 
in SBE. XLIL — 22 Contributions. Fourth Series, AJPh. 425 ff.; SBE. XLII. 489. — 
23 See^note 5. — H St. 1 with interesting variants^ occurs in Yaska’s Nirukta 3, 4. 

— 25 SB. 10.5.2.20; 13. 4. 3. 9; 16. 2. 15; AS. 10. 7. 5; Chand. Up. 7. 1/26'. 

Cp. RV. 7, 50, and, Rig-vidhana i- 2. 5; 27. I; 28. 1—3. — 26 SPAW. 1S96, 
p, 681 — 4; 873 — 5; Festschrift fiir A. Bastian, p. 361 — 6. Cp. now IS. XYIIL 215. — 
27 Jacob, Eleven Atharva^ia-Upanisads, p. 83— 88; Weber, IS. XVIL i6i ff. ; DeusseS% 
Sechzig Upanishad’s, p. 627 ff. — 23 Weber, ibid. p. 167. — 29 Bloomfield, Seven 
Hymns of the AV., AJPh. VIL 482 ff.; SBE. XLII. 511. — SBE. XLIL 374; 
Weber, SPAW., 1896, p. 684 note, 875. — 31 A. Kuhn, KZ. Xni. 49 ff., ii3ff.; 
Zimmer, p. 393; SBE. XLIL 22 ff., 313 ff.; cp. Wise, p. 307, 348 ff. — 32 Wise, 
p. 296; Zimmer, p. 390. — 33 See the note on 6. iii. 4, .SBE. XLIL 520. Cp. 
IS. I. 21 7, note. — 34 Cp. Susruta l, 89. 19, daivabalapravrtta ye devadrohad 
abhisdsiakd atharvakrtd upas argak rids ca {vyddhayabi), — 33 SBE. XLII. 409 and 29 1. 

— 36 Ibid. 302. — 37 Ibid. 308, 310. 

$ 51. Class 2). Prayers for long life and health {dyusydui ). — The 
second class of hymns to which tradition fittingly assigns the name dyusydni 
(sc. suktdniY is not separated by hard and fast lines from the medicinal 
charms. Thus 19. 44, though it exhibits in the main the characteristics of 
an dyusyam^ mentions specifically a considerable list of diseases; or 3, ii which 
also mentions diseases is employed^ Kaus. 27. 32 — 33, in an interesting sym- 
bolic practice directed against grdmya vyadhh the commentators pretty con- 
sistently explain this as venereal disease L Throughout the irauta and grhya- 
texts are found in enormous quantity formulas and stanzas which pray for 
life (<^2^3*), life’s breath {frdna^ etc.), and incidentally for all other desiderata, 
such as mrcas^ bala, yasas^ ktrti (strength' and glory), cattle and other pro- 
perty. In the forthcoming Vedic Concordance the formulas and padas 
beginning alone with the words dyus and dlrgha {dyus)^ or derivatives from 



64 n. Literature anp History, i u. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana, 


these words, number 200 or more a The characteristic feature of such formulas, 
as also of the dyusydni in the AV., is not so much prayer for the cure of disease 
as the eager endeavor to secure life unto the ideal old age of a hundred 
years ^ for a . person, either a sacrificer, or still more frequently, a boy entering 
adult life through the various ceremonial stages attendant upon the develop- 
ment of the young Hindu from birth to confirmation {upanayana). Hence 
these hymns are employed very properly in the Atharvan ritual under the 
rubric of dyusydni karmdni\ beginning Kaus. 52. 18, and containing the 
ceremonies of tonsure {cfidakarman). shearing -of the beard and the 

upanaya7ia. The Grhya-sutras exhibit them in much the same way on the 
same occasions: the Atharvan materials show little originality and fret]uently 
coincide with the mantras of the other Samhitas. A survey of one or two 
of these charms, e. g. 2. 28 or 3. 1 1, discloses at once the very familiar 
catch-words of the entire class: they ask for life Kdyus^ jivana^ asu, prana- 
pdnau)\ it shall last a hundred years {saiasdrada^ satam Mmdli, satdyus)\ 
death shall not come until old age ( jaras^ jard^ jariman^ Jardmriyu, jarad- 
asti)\ the charm shall protect against the regrettably large number of deaths, 
100 or more {mrtyavo ... satam ye^ 2. 28. i; anye mrtyavo y an dhur itanim 
chatam^ 3. ii. 7; ekasatam^ 8. 2. 27): loi deaths are still remembered by 
Susruta (Ayur-veda i. 122. loj as a characteristic conception of the AV., 
ekottaram mrtyuiatam atha7‘vdnah pi^acaksate (cp. SEE. XLII, p. 307); finally, 
Yama, Mrtyu, Antaka, Nirrti, etc. are cajoled with politenesses and obeisance. 
Of course this technique is by no means restricted to the dyusjd7ii\ not only 
is it exhibited a fortiore by the medicinal charms, but also the charms for 
prosperity in general and the witchcraft-charms naturally avail themselves of 
it Yet it is unmistakably the specialty of this class: the Sutra and the 
Atharvan scholiasts deserve credit for defining it schematically and presenting 
the employment of the hymns in question in the very situations to which they 
owed their composition at least in a 1 irge measure. 

A noteworthy characteristic of these hymns is the special prominence of 
Agni, whereby hangs a bit of ancient mythological history. Agni himself is 
Ayu ‘alive^; the personal Ayu of the myths and legends, notably Ayu, the son 
of Pururavas and UrvasT, is not likely ever to divulge his true nature without 
the same naturalistic back-grounds. Hence the 4ya/£y^r-hymns place life in 
the special charge of Agni, without, of course, excluding other divinities. In 
the Yajus-texts, Grhya-sutras, and Upanisads also Agni is frequently associated 
with life's breaths^. Typical for the AV. is 7. 53. 6, dyur no visvato dadhad 
ay am agnir vareiiyaJy The hymns 2. 13; 28; 29; 7. 32 and other scattered 
stanzas furnish illustrations of this point Otherwise the absence of salience 
of these hymns is relieved only by the association with them of life-bestowing, 
and life-protecting amulets which are in the main truly Atharvanic. The 
golden amulet which the Daksayanas, rich in the possession of gold, fastened 
npom Satamka (i. 35) is such a one*; an amulet of gold is used also with 
19. 36. Salve (dn/ana) figures in 4. 9; 19. 44; 45; the pearl and its shell in 
4, 10; the p&tudru-tree in 8. 2; an amulet addressed as as/r/a ^unconquered^ ^ 
in 19. 46. Similarly the s.icred girdle (mMa/d) furnishes the basis of an 
dytisyam in 6.133; the shearing of the beard is turned into a life-giving 
ceremony in 6.' 68. Quaintly docs the hymn 3. 31 solder together a mixtum 
compositum to the same end out of a variety of psycho-physical and mytho- 
logical reminiscences^. The hymns 8. i and 2, employed Kaul 58. 3, ii in 
special ceremonies called brdhinanoktam and rsihasta (parts of upanayand)^ 
are Atharvanesque by virtue of their impassioned fervor and great length. 
The relationship of this type with the prose formulas of the Yajus and the 



Ill Contents OF THE Atk^rva-Veda IN THE SaunakTva-School. 65 


Grhyas betrays itself in the so-called hymns 2.15 — 17; 5. 9; the prose form- 
ulas that go to make up 19. 51; 60; 61; 67 occur in these texts also^^ 
The remaining izy/z^y^r-hyrans are devoid of either mythological or antiquarian 
interest (i, 30; 3. ii; 5. 28; 30; 6. 41; 53; 19. 24; 27; 58; 70), and glide 
over imperceptibly into a style of hymn which is not strictly dyiisya^ being 
regarded otherwise {pausjika\ our class 8^ S 57) by the Sutra. They are in 
reality not different in their general purpose (i. 31; 4. 13; 6. 5; 13; 16. 4; 
19. 30; 32; 33; see also the long so-called z/fw^/^Z-hymn, book 17). 

I See SBE, XLIE 49 ff,, and notes; Kausika, Index B, p- 383% s.v. dymyani; cp. 
Meyer, Rig-vidhana, Introduction, p. xii, under the heading ‘longa vita’; Svidh. 

2. i; PG. I. 16. 5 ff. — 2 SBE. XLIL 341. — 3 We refer- to the formulas of the 
type, ayi^r ///*.’ dehi\ ayuh pranamme dkukyua\ dyuspd agne ayur me pa hi', dirgha^ 
yuivdya saiamraddya\ etc. — 4 Weber, IS. XVII. 193 ff.; Festgruss an Rudolf von 
Roth, p- 137. — 5 Bergaigne, La Religion Vddique, 1 . 59 ff.; IL 9 iff.; RV. 4. 2. 18, 
martdndm cid ut'vasir akrpran vrdhe cid arya uparasyayoh ‘for mortals even many 
Urvasls (‘fire-sticks’) were prepared (root krp «= kip) unto the production of the 
noble Ayu (‘fire’) below’. Pururavas and UrvasI suggest the fire-sticks; Ayu is their 
son: VS. 5. 2; TS. i. 3. 7. i; 6. 3. 5. 3; MS. 1. 2. 7; 3. 9. 5; SB.* 3- 4 * n 22; 
KS. 5. I. 30; ApS. 7. 12. 13; Kaus. 69. 20. The expression bahavo me samandh, 
used by Ayu, MS. 1. 6- 12, refers to the many individual productions of fire; cp. 
the brothers ofAgni. See howBloomfield, JAOS. XX. iSoff. Differently GELDNER,Ved. 
Stud. I. 243ff., especially 283. — ^ E. g- VS. 3. 17; TS. i. 5. 5. 3; 7. 4; SB. 2. 3. 
4. 19; SvS. 2. II., 3; PG. 2. 4. 8; Prasna Up. 1. 7; MaitriUp. 6. 5, 9, 33; cp. SBE. 
Xlffl. 366. — 7 SB. 6. 7* 4* 2; Weber, IS. IV. 358, 430* Cp- Rvidh. 4. 9. i. — 

8 S3,yana, astriandmdkhyamanK — 9 JAOS. XV. iSiff. ; SBE. XLIL 3^4 ff* t" 
*0 Hymns 19. 60 and 61 in TS. 5. 5. 9. 2; GB. 2. 1. 3; TA. (Andhra) 10. 72; ApS. 

3. 20, 3; PG. 1. 3. 25; Vait. 3. 14. Hymn 67 frequently in the Grhya-stltras. 

S 52. Class 3). Imprecations against demons, sorcerers, and 
enemies {dbhicdrikdiii and krtydpratiharajidni ), — The third class of 
hymns is directed against demons, sorcerers, and enemies^: between hostile 
human sorcerers and dangerous demons the Atharvanic Hindu knows no 
distinction, as may be seen from 2. 1'S, where the bhrdirvya, sapatfia, ardya, 
J>isdca, and saddnvd are successively placed under the same ban. The de- 
limitation of this class is again somewhat uncertain and subjective. On the 
side of demonology it touches upon the first class, because the remedial 
charms are not unfrequently directed against possession by demons. In so 
far as it is composed of imprecations and sorceries against enemies it con- 
catenates with the royal rites (class 6, § 55) whose battle-charihs assail the 
enemy in' essentially identical terms; with the imprecations of Brahmans against 
those that neglect and oppress them (class 7, % 56); with the love-practices 
of women, in so far as they are calculated to undermine rivals (class 4, S 53); 
and with the charms designed to secure influential position in the community 
and superiority in general (class 5, § 54), inasmuch as here also rivalry is 
expressed or implied. The present class covers however the central ground 
of what is known as abhicdra and yaiuvidyd {raksovidyd), the terrible side 
{gJiora) of this Veda. A wide-spread tradition reaching back to the Vedic 
hymns themselves associates this part of the Veda with the semi-divine race 
of the Ahgiras: such charrns are known as the aiigirasaby the second part of 
the old designation of the AV, {atharvdngirasah)\ the terin Ahgirasa-veda 
also occurs L All this in distinction from the atharvdmh (Atharvana-veda) 
which refers to the auspicious charms and practices {bkesaja^ smta, and 
pau 0 ka)K The ttxnxi dbkkdra is generic; the Atharvan and other Yedic 
texts know in addition krtyd ^spelF, valaga ‘secret spelP, and mula-karman 
{•kriyd) ‘practices with the roots of plants’, performances undertaken more 
drastically with tangible objects: magic or spells are placed or hidden in 
places where they may most injure The hymn 10, i represents the krtyd 

Indo-Aryan Research IL 1 c. 5 



66 11. Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


as an elaborate effigy (bogey) with head, nose, and ears; the ritual is well 
acquainted with similar artful devices TheVedic texts, and more schemat- 
ically the later Vidhana-literature, present terms, which assume growingly a 
technical flavor, for a variety of special phases of sorcer}*: sapatnakid/iana, 
nairbddha^ vmdsana, pldana^ mdrana^ vasikarana^ vidvesam^ mohajia, sta- 
mbhana^ cdtana, uccdtana^ etc.; these are grouped variously as the systematic 
subdivisions of abhkara^. The Atharvan makes further the important distinction 
between sorcery which takes the initiative (ab/ikdra), and defensive, or retal- 
iative sorcery; the latter' merely repels the practices undertaken by others 
{pratyabhicarana^ pratisara] and prathmria). In the later systematization 
(e. g. Rig-vidhana 4. 6. 4; 8. 3) the term dfigirasa — dbhicdrika is modulated 
similarly into praty dfigirasa = pratyabkicarana^ . 

All India is pervaded by sorcery from the RV. (7. 104; 10. 84; 128; 
155) through the Yajus-literature, and, curiously enough, also the Upanisads \ 
through' the systematic Vidhana^texts to the Tantras of the worshippers of 
Sakti. Especially the Yajus and Srauta-texts frequently abandon for a moment 
their main theme in keen remembrance of ‘him that hates us and whom we 
hate’®. This is done either by imparting to one or another sacrificial act a 
sinister turn by a conscious symbolic modification of the practice, or in the 
course of the so-called kdmycsjayahy many of which are directed against 
enemies. Thus the formulas of the ritual-literature are (juite frequently iden- 
tical with, or similar to prose passages of the ah hie dr a of the A\h: in 

addition to the formula, yo asmdn dvesjfi yam ca vayam dvismah^ we may 
mention especially those of the type, idam akam tarn vaiagam ut kirami f 
or the very common form, idam aham amum dmtisjdyamvn anuisydh putram 
(etc., with sinister close) Thus the ^2:i^/5zVar<z-litany AV.2.19 — 23 is developed 
secondarily in accordance with specific Atharvanic cosmogonic ideas ^ out of 
formulas in MS. i. 5. 2; ApS. 6. 21. i. In judging the chronology of the 
Atharvan collection in its finished aspect it is important to note that these 
formulas certainly existed in Vedic literature outside of Atharvanic schools, 
and prior to any Atharvan redaction. The practice of sorcery, if not its im- 
precations, goes back at least to Indo-Iranian times (Avestan ydiu) 

The class of abkicdra^^mxi% in which the offending power is rather 
of the demoniac sort is represented by the following: i. 7; 8; and 28 are 
directed against Yatudhana, KimTdin (Atrin), Pisaca, etc.; in the first two the 
incantation endeavours especially to make the Yatudhanas come out and pro- 
claim their true character: as soon as they reveal their nature they become 
innocuous. The demoniac brood is attacked i. 16 with lead which is regarded 
as especially offensive to demons ^ a Lead figures .also in the elaborate exorc- 
ism of Agni Kravyad, the funeral fire, personified as a demon, 12, 2. On 
founding a family, or when the domestic fire is lighted after the funeral of 
the father, Agni Kravyad is conjured by assigning to him his own proper sub- 
stances: lead, reeds, a black sheep, and beans (Kaui 71. 6 IT.). A similar rite 
is untertaken with sts. 13, 14 in a variant form at ApS. 9.3. 22; cp. the use 
of beans, Ovid. Fast 429 — 444 Here belongs also the elaborate conjuration 
of numerous obscure evil demons (hocus-pocus of the lowest bathos) 8. 6, 
designed apparently to secure safe delivery of women feee below, g 53), 
Demons (or diseases) called mskandha and kdbava are exorcised in 3. 9 with 
a certain amulet which Kausika derives from the aralii-\xt^. and which is 
fastened by a reddish-brown thread. A variety of female demons (sadd/zm; 
cp. RV. 10. 155), very obscure as to their individual designations, are con- 
ceived as hostile to men, cattle, and home; they are driven out by means of 
2. 14. An- amulet derived from a certain keen-sighted, keen-eyed plant in 



III. Contents of the Atharva-Veda in the SaunakIya-School. 67 

the nature of a sun-flower, known to the ritual as sadampuspa, makes visible, 
ergo impotent, all sorts of demons in 4. 20: it ‘sees here, sees yonder, sees 
in the distance, sees’..., and therefore ‘drags out from his retreat the sorcerer 
and the Kimidin’ The apivmdrga-yp\:^Xit^ by virtue of its superficial etymology 
{apa marj ‘wipe out’), as well as certain peculiarities of its natural history, 
liere as in the Srauta-texts is appealed to against the same uncanny powers : 
three charms, 4.17 — 19 (cp. also 7.65), are addressed to it. More conventional 
are 6. 2 ; 34; and 52, directed against Raksas: they recur for the most part 
in the RV. and elsewhere. The prose hymns 2. 18 and 2. 19 — 23 (see above) 
efface the hazy boundary-line between demons and human enemies. 

Charms directed against human enemies are more numerous: they are 
at times quite general and colorless; more frequently they are specialized by 
addressing some definite divinity, or some plant or other substance in the 
nature of a protective amulet, or instrument of attack. Thus 6. 37; 7. 13 
and 59 are mere curses; 5. 29; 7. 34; 8. 3 (= RV. 10. 87, to Agni Raksohaiij ; 
19. 65; 66 are addressed to Agni; 7. no to Indra and Agni (battle-gods); 

7. 31 to Indra; 7. 91; 92 to Indra Sutraman; 7. 51 to Indra and Brhaspati; 

8. 4 to Indra and Soma (RV. 7. 104); 6.6 to Brhaspati and Soma; 7. 73 to 
the Marut Samtapanas (RV. 7. 59; TS. 4. 3. 13. 3): the sts. of these hymns 
recur largely in the other Samhitas and are conventionally Vedic, not especi- 
ally Atharvanic. More pointed are those with amulets and other instruments: 
1. 29, secondarily made up of sts. from RV. i. 174 and 159, attacks the 
enemy abhivartena inanmd'^^ ‘with the victorious amulef*; similarly 6.7,5 
nairbadhyajn Iiavis ‘the oblation of suppression’; and 3.6 with an amulet of 
asvatiha which has the epithet vaibddha ‘displacer’. A certain plant ‘god- 
begotten, hated by the wicked, which wipes out the curses (of enemies)’ is 
conjured in 2. 7; the talas similarly in 6. 15; the varana-Xxtt {var 
‘defend’; cp. 6.85) in the long hymn 10.3; an amulet formed in the likeness 
of a plough out of the hard khadiraditt^ which was used also in the manu- 
facture of real plough-shares is implored both for prosperity and destruction 
of enemies in 10. 6; and darblia-gx^s^ serves the same end, 19. 28; 29; 30; 
32; 33. In 6. 134 a staff {vajra) is used in sorcery against enemies; and 
6. 135 conjures one’s own food and drink ‘to drink away’ and ‘swallow up’ 
the life’s breath of the enemy. Very characteristic, though somewhat obscure, 
are the two imprecations 7. 95 and 96, directed against the two kidneys of 
an enemy: the point seems to be to stop their action so as to cause reten- 
tion of urine. The second of these charms (7. g6) seems however to have 
been composed originally as a medical charm for the cure of a movable 
kidney, having been adapted secondarily to a hostile purpose Decidedly 
loftier in tone and original in the AV. is the famous, oft-translated hymn. 
4. 16, a prayer to Varuna for protection against treacherous designs, whose 
fervor and ethical coloring suggests irresistibly scriptural parallels, especially 
from the Psalms®®; equally interesting is 2. 12, known in the ritual as ‘the 
cleaver of Bharadvaja’. This was for a long time misunderstood as depicting 
a fire-ordeal, but it is in reality an imprecation against an enemy thwarting 
holy work ®\ Conversely, 5.8 and 7.70 engage in this very impious practice, 
nainely the frustration of the sacrifice of an enemy: ‘Nifrti, allying herself with 
death, shall smite his offering before it takes effect’ (7.70.1). Closely related 
with these is the so-called vikavya-hyran 5.3 (~ RV. 10. 12S; TS. 4.7.14“): 
its name is derived from the word vihava^ translated in the lexicons rather 
loosely by ‘call’. It means ‘call in different directions’, ‘conflicting call’: the 
hymn iS' a good specimen of an early witchcraft practice, designed to attract 
the gods away from others to one’s own saorifice. In the /m///<2-ritual the 



68 II. Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


same notion is present vividly in the conflict of sacrifices called samsava^ or 
vispardhd^^. An especially Atharvanic flavor attaches to 7. 5 which is devoted 
to the extravagant praise of this same {vihavyd) hymn. The gods performed 
the human sacrifice ( pumsamed/ia), but mightier than that is the vi/iazya- 
sacrifice: in vain®-^ did they sacrifice a dog, in vain the limbs of a cow, the 
vihavya alone availed them (sts. 4, 5). Very characteristic, too, is the blend 
of witchcraft with original thepsophic conceptions in the hymn to Kama, ‘the 
bull that slays the enemy’, 9.2: kdma Tove’ is originally a cosmic force 
(RV. 10. 129. 4 ==== AV. 19. 52. i), but its personification as a supreme being 
suggests very soon his power to protect those who worship him, and to destroy 
the enemies of the worshipper (cp. below, $ 59). 

The class of ‘counter-witchcraft’ charms (J^rfydpraMaram) is char- 
acterized especially by the word praii and derivatives and compounds from 
it, t. g. pratyahhicarana 2.1 1.2; pratisara and pratlvarta^ S. 5. 1,4; pratyanc 
and pratidna 10. 1.6. The persons against whom these defensive charms are 
directed are designated, 5. 31. 12, as krtydkrt ‘he that fashions spells’, valagin 
‘he that digs for magic purposes’, midin ‘he that digs after roots’, a.nd ^apa- 
theyya ‘he that emits curses’ (cp. 4. 9. 5). A good specimen of the style of 
these defensive charms is 10. i. 6: ‘PratIcTna { ‘Back-hurler’), the descendant 
of Angiras, is our overseer and Purohita: do thou drive back {pratm^ the 
spells, and yonder fashioners of the spells!’ Two of these charms (2.11; 8.5) 
are undertajcen with the srdktya-wcmXtt^ derived from the sraktya<Ttt (schoL 
tUaka)^^l anot|ier (5. 14) is addressed to a plant whose name is not stated; 
yet another, 2. 24, names four male kimtdin and four female kimliimyfildx curious, 
at times euphemistic designations, and calls upon their sorceries to turn against 
themselves, that is, against the perpetrators of these sorceries. Especially forceful 
is 5.31, containing a long catalogue of homely animate or inanimate objects 
within which spells were instituted: an unburned vessel, grain, raw meat; the 
cock, goat, and other animals; the house-fire, house, assembly- 
hall, gaming-place; the army, the drum, the arrow, and the weapon; the well, 
and the burial-place. A spell in the nature of a terrifying, evil-working figure 
(bug-bear, bogey, bogle; (German popanz) ‘endowed with nose, endowed with 
ears, and multiform’, ‘prepared by a Raja, prepared by a woman, prepared 
by Brahmans’, is driven out, under protestation of great loathing and fear, 
in 10. I. Prose formulas similar to those enumerated Kaus. 49. 7 flf. are 
banded together as hymns for the same purposes in 4. 40 and 5. 10. Curse 
personified is invoked against him that curses in 6. 37 and 7. 59. 

Ludwig, Der Rig-Vedjt, III. 338 ff.; Burnell, Sstmavidhana-Brahma^ia, Intro- 
duction, p, XXII ff.; Meyer, Rig-vidhana, Introduction, p; xiiiff.; Hardy, Die 
Vedisch-Brahmanische Periode, p. 1931!.; Oldenberg, Die Religion des Veda, 
p. 262f.;476ff.; HiLLEBRANDT, Ritual-Litteratur, p, 167 ff. ; 174ff.; BLOOMFIELD, 
SBE. XLII, p*64ff,, and notes; Magoun, AJPh. X. i65ff, ; Winternitz, Witchcraft 
in Ancient India, New World, September 1898. — » See the elaboration of this 
view, SBE. XLII, p. xvmff.; above, p. 8ff.; cp. Hillebrandt, l.c. 169, — 3 The 
frequent legends in the Brahmanas, narrating the conflict between the Angiras and 
the Adityas in connection with sacrificial performances, generally (not so AB, 6.34 ff.) re- 
present the Adityas as the pious, ultimately successful sacrificers, whereas the 
Angiras appear in a light similar to the Asuras in the so-called daimsiirdni (sc. akkyd’^ 
nam), i. e. they are worsted in the conflict: Weber, IS. 1, 292; IStr.IILSo: SPAW, 
1891, p. 8ii,ff. This also reflects perhaps, in a roundabout way, the wizard, im- 
pious character of the Angiras, and correspondingly the connection of holy rites 
with, the Adityas. Cp. the sti&Bm yajumsi aditydni in the (WebER, L c. 
p, 812, note 2). In the Yajus-formulas, however, both Angiras and Adityas are 
venerable: MS. i. d i (86. 7); i. 6. 2 (87. 3); Apl 5. 11.7; Katri. 70. 6. — 
4 See Kausika, Introduction, p. XLVU, s. vl dvalekham {pre^ikrii), and SBE. XLII, 
Index, under ‘effigy’. Cp. Hillebrandt, 1 . c. 177. Practices with roots are ex- 



III. CONTJENTS OF THE AtHARVA-VeDA IN THE SaUNAKTYA-ScHOOL. 69 


pregsly forbidden in the Dharma-texts, and execrated in the Mahabharata; SBE. 
XLII, p. L, nv (cp, above, S 26, 27). — 5 Goldstucker, Sanskrit Dictionary, g. v. 
adhicara; Meyer, Rig-vidhana, Introduction, p. Weber, IS. III. 156; Verz. 

L 270 ff.; IL 318, 1184; Hillebrandt, 1. c. 177, note i. — 6 See AV, 2. ii. i; 
Kau§ika, Index B, s. v. J:riy(ipraiiharanani (cp. AV. 5. 14). For pratisara and praii- 
varia see SBE. XLII. 576; Weber, APAW. 1893, P* iox praty a iigiras a, SBE, 

XLII, p. XIX, and above, p. 8. — 7 See SB. 14. 9. 4, 10 = Brh. Ar. Up. 6. 4. 12; and 
cp. the Gariidopanisad. — ^ Burneil, 1. c. xxiii; L. v. Schroeder, Indiens Litter 
ratitr, p. I2i*fr. — 9 VS. 5. 23; TS. e 3. 2, i; MS. I. 2. 10; Apb. ii. ii. 8, etc. 

— 10 E. g. MS, 4 7. 9 (106, 3); ApS. 14. 6. 12. — 1 1 See above, § 45. — 

— ^2 Sbiecel, Die Arische Periode, p. 2i8fr.; Geiger, Civilization of the Eastern 

Iranians, I. 160 ff. — ^3 SBE. XLII. 256- — '^A Ludwig, Der Rig-Veda, III. 479; 
Henry, LesLivres X — XIT, p. 188 ff., 227 ff. Cp. SBE. XLII, Index, under * beans’ and 
‘sesame’. — ^5 SBE. XLII. 68, 398 ff.; Contributions. Seventh Series, AJPh. XVII. 
402 ff. — 16 VS. 35. II; SB. X3- 8. 4. 4. Cp. e. g. the apmiarga-homa at the 
Rajasuya: Weber, APAW., 1S93, P‘i7ff*» and the indexes to Oldenberg, Religiorx 
des Veda {apamargiP^ and SBE. XLII (‘plants and trees’). — ^7 RV. 1. 174. I, 

abhlvartena havisa* It is not easy to decide which reading is older, as does Weber, 
IS. IV. 423, note, in flavor of havisa: both maul and ^tavis are characteristically 
Atharvanic. See for the //<2w>-hymns, below, § 60, end. The hymn is known aS 
the abhlvariam (sc. sukiani)^ ApS. 14. 19. 6; 20. i; AG. 3. I2. 12 j Kaus. i6. 29. — 
^8 See the authorities for this construction, SBE. XLII. 608 ff. — ^9 Ludwig, Der 
Rig-Veda, III. 343, 344, 517; Henry, Le livre VII, p. 38 ff., 109 ff. Differently, 
Weber, IS. V. 247. — SBE. Xldl, p. 88, 389 ff. — Contributions. Second 
Series, AJPh. XL 330 ff.; SBE. XLII. 89, 244 ff. — 22 Also vihavTya, KS. 25. 14. 18. 
See TS. 3. 1. 7. 3; PB. 9. 4. 14; LS. 4. 10. 8. In Kaui 38. 26 this hymn is 
recited secondarily but significantly by a father who is about to divide his prop- 
erty, so that no quarrels shall ensue. — 23 See Hillebrandt, Soma, p. 119 ff.; 
Ritual-Litteratur, p. 166; Garbe, Vaitana, Translation, 16.6; 17.7, notes. Cp. TS. 
2. 4. 1 — 3. — ^4 Henry’s emendation of mugdha to mnrdkna (Le livre VII, p. 2, 
49) thus becomes unnecessaiy. — 25 SBE. XLII. 70—80, and the notes on the 
hymns there rendered. Cp. KauL 39. 7, and Hillebrandt, Ritual-Litteratur, p. 178. 

— 26 Seven Hymns, AJPh. VIL 477 ff.; SBE. XLII. 575, 

§ 53. Class 4), Charms pertaining to women (strTkarmani). — 
The scheme of the Atharvan ritual makes provision for a class of practices 
aptly designated as ‘womens’ rites’ istfikarmani)\ they are treated connect- 
edly in the second half of the fourth book of Kaiisika (32. 28 to the end 
of the book). The practices there work up very intelligently a quite con- 
siderable number of hymns scattered through the first seven books of the 
AV. (in addition only k 6); these are sufficiently marked to entitle them to 
treatment in a class by themselvesL In the centre of these hymns stand the 
wedding- stanzas of the suryd-sukta (RV, 10. 85) whose Superior length and 
importance, however, calls for a separate presentation and a separate account 
of the practices connected with them, in the 14*^ book of the AV. and the 
10^^ book of Kausika^. The eventful life of women before, during, and after 
marriage has given rise to many practices and charms which are naturally- 
ignored by the main current of V^dic tradition, the Srauta-literature, but 
fitly embodied in the Atharvan and the Grhya-sutras. The RV. in addition 
to the wedding-stanzas (10. 85; also 10. 40, and elsewhere) has a number 
of such charms in the 10^^ book (145, 159, 162, 183); in the Srauta-literature 
passages like TS. 2. 3. 9. i; MS. 2. 3. 2; TB; 2, 3. 10 (love-charms), or SB. 
14. 9. 4 Brh. Ar.Up. 6. 4, devoted to women, attract attention by their rareness 
and comparative incompatibility with their surroundings. The Gfhya-rites are 
also restricted in the main to the more normal auspicious feminine practices: 
wedding cefemonies, and the holy performances (samskdras) connected with 
pregnancy and child-birth. A sorcery-practice like ApG. 3. 9. 4 ff. (Mantrapatha 
I. 15 == RV. 10. 145 «=* AV, 3. 18), designed to cut out the co-wives or rivals 
of a woman, is rare and has quite the Atharvanic flavor. Similarly HG. i. 
14. 7; ApG. 8. 23. 3. The later Vidhana-literature, on the other hand, repro- 



70 IL Literature and His'I'ORy. i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


duces and systematizes the sorcery-rites of women, doubtless in direct con- 
tinuation of practices especially common in the Atharvan schools. Panini 
4. 4. 96 still describes as rsat/^ I e, as Vedic, the kind of mantra which he 
calls /rrdya^ according to the scholiast in the sense of /irdayasja band/mnah 
^captivating the hearty or vaiikaranamantraly. doubtless he has in view 
both the love-charms of the present category, and the more general concil- 
iatory hymns of the following class The Rig-vidhana employs the terms 
hrdya^ samvanana^ and vafikarana for both these kinds of charms: i, 2. 5; 
2. 35. 2] 3. 15. 2 k; 19. 3 ft; 21. 4, etc.^; the Samavidhana-brahmana treats 
the corresponding matters in 2. 5 and 6, where Sayana has also frequent 
occasion to employ the verb vaMar\ they are also known in the Tantric 
sorcery-books {strlvasya^ pativasya^ etc.) 5 . 

The majority of the hymns in question are devoted to the relation of 
the two sexes. Especially common are philtres or love-charms performed by 
men as well as women: i. 34; 2. 30; 3, 25; 6. 8; 9; 89; 102: 129; 130 — 132; 
3:39,; 7 * 3S; in these various plants and other substances, herbs, licorice, salve, 
kustha^ spikenard, etc., are invoked to lend charm to the person performing 
the philtre. Or the activities of animal-life and nature in general that are 
analogous to the emotions of love, are called upon to reproduce themselves 
in the beloved object: ‘I draw to myself thy mind as the leading stallion 
the female side-horse' (6. 102. 2); ‘the cows who lick their young, in whose 
heart love is planted, shall make yonder woman bestow love upon me’ 
(6, 9. 3); ‘as the wind tears this gra.ss from the surface of the earth, thus do 
I tear thy soul’ (2. 30. i); ‘as the creeper embraces the tree on all sides, 
thus do thou embrace me’ (6. 8. i) ; ‘thy heart shall parch with love of me, 
and thy mouth shall parch with love of me’ (6. 139. 2^; ‘we intiame thy 
heart, we inllanie thy mind’ (6. 89. 2). With the last j>assage c£ ‘ut feriatis 
et incendiatis cor et mentem N. in amorem meum’^ The arrow of the god 
of love figures 3. 25. 2: ‘the arrow, winged with longing, barbed with love, 
whose shaft is unswerving desire, with that, well-aimed, Kama shall pierce 
thee in the heart’ £ The formulaic hemistich, or its second pada, mama 
kratdv aso^ mama citiam upayasi^ ‘in order that thou shalt be at my bidding, 
shalt follow my thought’, recurs frequently: i. 34. 2; 3. 25. 5; 6. 42. 3; 43, 3; 
similarly, mdm kdminy aso^ yathd man ndpagd asak, i. 34. 5; 2. 30. i; 

6. 8. I. These expressions are indicative of a certain mechanical technique 
in the production of these philtres: they must have had a considerable market, 
but they certainly are not the worst that the Atharvan has preserved. Closely 
related with these philtres is another group aiming at the discomfiiture or 
destruction of rivals in love, or co-wives {sapatmbddkana^ Rvidh. 4. 12. i, 3}. 
Two hymns of this sort are found RV. 10. 145 (AV. 3. 18; ApMB. i. 15); 
and 10. 159 (ApMB. i. 16)^. The Atharvan has i. 14 (misunderstood by 
the earlier interpreters as a marriage hymn^); 3. i 3 ; 7. 35; 113; and 114: 
with fierce denunciation and uncanny practices one woman endeavors to rob 
another of her attractiveness, her hkaga (luck in love), or her fecundity. Still 
more drastic are two charms to deprive men of their virility, 6. 138 and 

7. 90: ^0 herb, turn this man for me to-day into a eunuch that wears his 
hair dressed . . that wears a hood! Then Indra with a pair of stones shall 
break his testicles both! ... A hood upon his head and a hair-net do we 
place’ (6. 13S). The converse of the preceding hymns are the charms to 
allay jealousy, aiming to. quench the fire, the heart-burning of love: 6. iS; 
7. 45; and 7. 74. 3, To the domain of romantic love belongs also 6. 77, a 
charm to cause the return of a truant woman, furnished with significant sym- 
bolic practices, Kaus. 36. 5 — 9; and 4. 5, a sleeping-charm preparatory to an 



HI. Contents of the Atharva-Veda in the Saunaktya-School. 71 


assignation, working up (perhaps with secondary adaptation) a number of 
stanzas of RV. 7. 55. 

The remaining hymns of this class belong to the calmer sphere of coit 
jugal life. The charm i. 18 (cp. 7. 115) aims to remove evil bodily charac- 
teristics and to drive out Arati from a woman, apparently that she may 
afterwards bear offspring (st. i^). These evil characteristics suggest those that 
are to be avoided when choosing a bride, in the Grhya-sutras and Dharma- 
sastras^®: the present hymn seems to be in the nature of a prayascitta calcu- 
lated to render such a woman fit for marriage. Next come the sD-calied 
pativedandni^ ‘charms to obtain a husband (or wife)’: 2, 36; 6. 60; and 6,82. 
Here the serene, auspicious gods Aryaman and Bhaga figure especially: the 
coloring is that of the wedding-stanzas and ceremonies. Similar is the position 
of 6. 78, a blessing upon a married (royal) couple; of 7. 37, a stanza in 
which the bride says to the bridegroom: T envelop thee in my garment 
that was produced by Manu, that thou shalt be mine alone, shalt not even 
discourse of other women!’; and 7. 36, a love-charm spoken by the bridal 
couple: ‘The eyes of us two shine like honey, our foreheads gleam like 
ointment Place me within thy heart; may one mind be in common to us!’ 
Finally the post-marital interests of conception, child-birth, and child-life are 
represented by a sufficient number of hymns: they are in close touch with 
the corresponding samskaras of the Grhya-sutras, which reproduce with more 
or less variation a considerable number of the stanzas of these hymns. The 
four lunar divinities Anumati, Raka, Simvall, and Kuhu are invoked with 
great predilection; Prajapati, Tva§tar, Dhatar figure frequently. The garbha- 
dhdna is represented by the robust epithalamium 5. 25, and by the more 
peculiarly Atharvanic charm 6. 81, in which a bracelet, ‘a holder’, called 
parihasta^ is invoked to secure conception: ‘The bracelet that Aditi wore, when 
she desired a son, god Tva$tar shall fasten upon this woman, intending that 
.she shall bear a son’. To obviate sterility Kaus. 34. i ff. prescribes a practice 
centering about AV. i. 32, an original cosmic hymn in praise of heaven, 
earth, and especially the atmosphere {antariksa): the relation of the hymn to 
the practice is obscure. The protection of the embryo in the womb, i. e., 
the prevention of miscarriage, is secured by the recital of 6. 17, along with 

5. I. I, and the hymn contained in Kaiii 98. 2“. The elaborate conjuration 
of evil demons with the greatest variety of unheard-of names, 8. 6, is used, 
Kaus. 35*20, in a rite which Kesava describes as the smanta-karma^^. Charms 
to secure the birth of a son ipumsavana) are 3. 23; 6. ii; 7. 17; and 7. 19. 
A clap-trap god Su§an, made from the root su ‘beget’ after the pattern of 
Pu§an, is invoked in the lively hymn i.ii to secure safe delivery: it belongs 
to the sphere of the sosyaniv-karma^ as it is. called in the Grhya-sutras and 
elsewhere ^ 3 . if the child is born under an unlucky star the expiatory charm 

6. no is recited: »Him that hath been born under (the constellation) 

ghni (‘she that slays the oldest’), or under the vicrtau (‘they that uproot’), 
save thou (O Agni) from being tom up by the root by Yama ... On a tiger- 
like day the hero was bom. . . Let him not slay, when he grows up, his 
father, let him not injure the mother that hath begotten him«. Finally the 
appearance, perhaps the irregular appearance, of the first pair of teeth the 
two tigers’ calls for the expiatory hymn, 6. 140. 

I Weber, IS. V, 177— 266; Zimmer, p* 305 fif.; SBE. XLII, p. 94— no, and the 
notes on the hymns there treated. — 2 gee below, $ 61. — 3 Weber, IS. V. 78, 
note; XVII. 215. — 4 See Meyer’s Introduction, p. xrv, xxxm. Pacini’s state- 
ment above is probably based directly on Rig-vidhtna 3. iS* 3 * the referred 
to is RV. lo. 83 and 84 = AV. 4. 31 and 32. — 5 Weber, Verz. 1 . 270 ff.; II. 
318, 1184; IS. IIL 156. — : 6 Weinhold, Die deutschen Frauen, p. 148; Weber, 



7 2 11. Literature and Hisi ory. i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


IS. V, 243. — 7 SEE. XLII. 359. — s They are employed ApG. 3. 9. 6 and 9. — 

9 See, Seven Hymns, AJPh. VII. 473 — 6j SBE. XLII. 252 ff. — 1° AG. 1. 5; .SG. 
I. 5. 5fif. ; Kans. 37. 7 if.; GG. 2. i. iff.; ApG. 1. 3. H; HG. i. 19. 4 0*.; Cyhya- 
samgraha 2. 21 — 23 (iara/aisana); Manu 3. 4 0 *.; Yajhav. I, 52, Cp. Haas, V. 
288; Bloomfield, ZDMG. XXXV. 573; VTinternitz, AWAW., 1892, volXL.ss jf,; 
Hillebrandt, Ritual-Litteratur, p. 64. — These hymns are call&d ^arMadrm^ am 
KauA 35. 12; the one whose pratlka is acyuta (Kaus. 98. 2) is said by Dsriia to 
be from another sakha [sakhahtMlyasuktani)'. we may expect in AVF. Cp. SG* 
I. 21; AG. 1. 13. i. — 12 Weber, IS. 5. 251 ff.; Ludwig, Ber Rig-Veda, III, 5230“.; 
Henry, Les Livres VIII et IX, p. 17, 54 ff. — *3 See SBE. XLIL 99, 2420*. 

S 54. Class 5), Charms to secure harmony, influence in the 
assembly, and the like (sammanasyani, etc.). — The present class of 
hymns ^ exhibits many points of contact with the preceding, differing from it 
most conspicuously by the absence of the element of romantic, sexual love. 
The boundary between the two classes is hard to set: a conciliatory charm 
like I. 34 may be, and is employed to secure the love of a person of the 
opposite sex (Kaul 76. 8, 9; 79. 10), or it may be recited by one who wishes 
to gain the ear of the sahhdy the village assembly (Kaus. 38. 17). Or, the 
hymn 6,42 aims to appease anger without specifying the enraged person (cp. 
HG. I. 15. 3); it may however have been constructed originally to end the 
conflict between a woman and her husband or paramour (Kaul 36. 28 — 31). 
The later tradition harbors both classes of charms and practices within the 
terms hrdya^ samvanana, and vastkarana (see above, S 53)? blending the 
two in its literary presentations^. The Srauta-texts are also acquainted with 
practices of this sort which figure among the kdmya utayaly^ e. g. SS. 3. 6. i, 
and the so-called mitravindd^ SS. 3. 7; AS. 2, ii; KS. 5. 12. 13. The key- 
note of the present class is harmony {sanimanas^ sdmmanasya^ saumanasa^ 
samjndna); harmony, of course, from the point of view of the person prac- 
tising the charm; harmony that agrees with his personal views and desires, 
and leaves him in the position of arbiter and superior. The Brahmaija-story 
of Cyavana the Bhargava, or Angirasa, vividly portrays family dissensions as 
a curse: ‘Father fought with son, and brother with brother’. ‘Then neither 
did mother know son, nor son mother’^. Quarrels in the family (ku/e kala- 
hint I yatraitat kulam kalahi bhavati) are regarded as portentous, the family 
has been attacked by Nirrti: they require elaborate expiation^. This, then, 
is the theme of one group of hymns in this class: the stilling of wrafh and 
discord, and the establishment of harmony between contending persons or 
parties. The other group, more subjectively, aims at success, prominence, 
or superiority in social and political life: favor among men, influence in the 
assembly, success in debate, and subordination to one’s will. None of these 
themes are entirely unknown in Vedic literature in general, but nowhere are 
they treated as prominently or distinctly as in the Atharvan. The RV. has 
two hymns of this sort, 10* 166 and 191 (cp. RV. Khila similar 

stanzas occur MS. 2. 6. 6; TB. 2, 4* 4. 4.&; cp. also VS. 7. 25; SB. 4. 2. 4. 23. 
Practices bearing upon such hymns are described Kaui 12* 5 ff.; 38. raff; 
97, I ff.; HG. I. 13. I9ff.;,i5., 2 ff.; ApG. S. 22. 19 ff,; Svidh. .2. 5; Rvidh. 4. 
20. 3; 24.4. 

Two hpms, 6. 42 and 43, are constructed to appease anger; the latter 
charm is reinforced by the use of darbha-grB,SB which for the nonce wears 
the title ‘appeaser of wrath’ {manyusamana). They are the converse of the 
two hymns 4, 31 and 32 (*=^ RV. 10. 84 and 83) in which Wrath personi- 
fied is conjured to destroy enemies^. Four hymns, 6. 64; 73; 74; 7. 52, aEay 
disord, suspend strife and bloodshed. Especially fervent and picturesque is 
ihe appeal for harmony in the family, 3. 30: ‘Unity of heart, and unity of 



III. Contents of the Atharva-Veda in the SaunakTya-School. 73 

mind, freedom from hatred do I procure for you. Do ye take delight in 
one another, as a cow in her new*boni calf! The son shall be devoted to 
his father, be of the same mind, with his mother; the wife shall speak honied, 
sweet, words to her husband 1 The brother shall not hate the brother, and 
the sister not the sister! Harmonious, devoted to the same purpose, speak ye 
words in kindly spirit!’ Another charm, 3. 8, is employed specifically at the 
u^anayana, Kaul 55. 17, 18, to ensure harmony between teacher and pupil 
the stanza 7. 44 (— RV. 6. 69. 8) is adapted deftly, Xaus. 42. 6, as a charm 
for the reconciliation *of two enemies. Of the charms to secure influence in 
the assembly 2, 27 and 17. 12 are the most significant The former under- 
takes with the aid of a talisman of the /cf/^-plant to overcome the debate 
(J^rds) of a hostile disputant (pratiprdsp, the latter addresses ‘assembly and 
meeting, the two daughters of Prajapati’: they shall aid him to capture the 
power and understanding of those that are sitting in council Very similar 
to the last is the tenor of 6. 94 whose keymote is the technical word sam- 
nam ‘to bend to one’s will’. This word and its derivativ^e sainnati i-homdh) 
is used elsewhere to bend the heavenly powers to one’s will I More or less 
connected with these themes are also the hymns i. 34 (see above); 5. 15; 
6. 15; 7. 94, and the sts. 5. i. 5; 19. 62. i. 

1 SBE. XLII, p. 134—139; cp. Kaus, 12. 5; I.udwig, Der Rig-Veda, III. 253 ff., 
344; Zimmer, p. 172; Weber, iA XVII. 212, ^307. — 2 ApG. 8. 22. 19—23. 6; 
HG. I. 14. 6 — 15. 8; Svidh. 2. 5 and 6. — 3 SB. 4. I. 5. 3fr. *, cp. the version of 
the JB., as rendered by Whitney, JAOS. XI, p. cxlv. — 4 Kaus. 97; 31^* 5* 3 =* 
Adbhuta-Br. i, 3; AdbhutasSnti, Ath, Pari§. 67. 4 (Weber, Omina und Portenta, 
p. 317, 320); cp. also SS. 3. 6, — 5 Used as battle-charms, below, % 55, end. — 
o Weber, IS. XVII. 212. — 7 Seven Hymns, AJPh. VII. 479 ff-; SHE. XLII. 137, 
304 fF. — « Cp. AV. 4. 39; Kaul 5. 8; 59. 16/, 68. 37; 72. 37; TS. 3. 4. 4* t; 
7. 23. i; MS- X. 4, 14; TB. 3. 8. 18. 5; ApS. 20. 12. 8; PG. i- 5. 10; cp. IS. 

XVn. 214; SBE. XLII. 508. 

§ 55- Class 6). Charms pertaining to royalty (rajakarmahi). — 
The Atharvan moves in social extremes. On the one hand the practitioners 
of this Veda catered largely to the wants and fears of the poor villagers of 
India; hence later the scornful epithets grdmaydjin and pugayajniya^. On 
the other hand the most practical interests of the higher classes, the kings 
and priests, were also largely dependent upon Atharvanic priests and rites. 
The interests of the priests are expounded in the hymns of the next class; 
the spiritual specialties of their religion {brahma) figure also, to be sure in 
a peculiarly exaggerated and confused form, in the theosophic hymns (class i o) : 
it is not to be doubted that the presence of these elements contributed to 
the claim of the Atharvanic ritualists that their Veda was the Brahma- Veda 
With scarcely less show of justice the Atharvan might have, assumed the 
designation ksaira-veda^ had it been advantageous to name it so. Indeed Prof. 
Weber and the writer have pointed out certain circumstances and literary 
statements, not altogether unambiguous, which make it seem that the Atharvan 
was in certain moods regarded as the Veda of the K^atriyas^. Such it was 
without doubt to a considerable extent, but other phases of the same Veda 
succeeded in impressing themselves still more vigorously. In this matter 
the attitude of the Atharvan schools may be said to be significant for the 
development of Hindu religion, after the Vedic (irantd) ritual had passed 
its halcyon days. But for the overwhelming interest in theosophic specul- 
ations of the Upani§ad variety the later Atharvans would not have found it 
to their advantage to spin out treatises on the brahma and the b^n (Atharvan 
Upanisads), but would have confined themselves more to the worldly ad- 
vantages derivable from their profession. In practice their aspirations found 



74 n. Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


during all this period^ down to the times of the Dasakumaracarita, their most 
profitable field in the service of kings as Purohitas and chaplains on the 
field of battle^. The basis for these functions are the hymns of the present 
class: they deal with the assumption of royalty (consecration and election); 
with the development and aggrandisement of its strength and lustre; with the 
defence of king and country against enemies from outside; in a measure also 
they aim to bestow upon the Purohita the spiritual force necessary for his 
effectiveness as the prime coadjutor of the kings All tliese subjects are 
alluded to scatteringly in the RV. and the other Sainhitas (cp. especially RV. 
10. 103; 152; 173; 174, and 6. 47. 26 ff; 6. 75), but the AV. manifests itself 
here, as elsewhere, in closer touch with real popular life in presenting the 
largest number of hymns of this sort. They are supported by a long section 
of so-called rdjakarmdni (‘royal rites’) in the Kaurika (14 — 17)^ The in- 
herent importance of these subjects accounts for the presence in the Srauta- 
ritual of a very large number of practices intimately connected with the wel- 
fare of the K.satriyas, such as rdjasuya^ vajapeya^ sautrdmanl^ and mvamedha^ 
all of which were elaborated by the priests out of existing pof)ular practices. 
Also the kdmyestayak^ the sacrifices designed to secure the fulfilment of spec- 
ial desires, incidentally and trustworthily reflect the frequency and familiarity 
of royal practices: e. g. in the offering to Indra and Bfhaspati, the heavenly 
king and his Purohita, designed to remedy the decadence of sovereignty 
{iaktistambkananivdraka)^ TS. 2. 4. 13; MS. 2. i. 12; or in the sacrifices of 
him that desires conquest (jayakdma), TS- 2, i. 13; MS. 2. 5. 3, 8, 9. The 
Grhyi-'<--sutras have little, if anything, of this sort (e. g. the battle-charms, AG. 
3. 12), whereas the Vidhana-literature and the AV. Parisi^tas abound in rdja- 
karmani: Rvidh. 2. 22. i; 24. 3 — 5; 4. 2. 3; 8. i, 2; 14. $; 21. iff.; Svidh. 
3. 5 and 6; Yvidh., Agni-Purana, adhyaya 259, sts. 66 — 73; Ath. Paris. 2 ff. 
That the existence of similar practices is presupposed by the Dharma-texts, 
the Epic, and thence through classical times, has been shown above 7 . Throughout 
these hymiis Indra, the king, is the heavenly prototype of the earthly king, 
admitting complete identification or merging of the two (3, 3. 2; 4. 6); King 
Varuna figures similarly, suggesting occasionally, with a pun on the name, 
the electoral power {var ‘choose’: 3. 4. 5, 6). Brhaspati or Brahmanaspciti, 
of course, represents the Purohita (ii. 10. 10 ff). 

The consecration of a king has elicited the hymn 4. 8, composed with 
true appreciation of the dignity of royalty, and reflecting genuine popular 
institutions. In perfect accord with the descriptions of the rdjasuya in the 
Srauta-texts two prominent acts are indicated: the king is sprinkled with holy 
water mixed with the essence of auspicious plants; and he steps upon a 
tiger-skin^. Conceived in a similar high spirit is 3. 4, a prayer at the elect- 
ion of a king: the god Varuna, himself a heavenly king, figures as the divine 
elector, his name being for the nonce derived from the root var ‘choose’^. 
The restoration of an exiled king is accomplished with 3. 3, reinforced by 
Kausika with significant symbolic practices. Quite a number of hymns are 
designed to ensure to a king superiority over other kings, sole rulership, and 
royal power generally: 4. 22; 6. 54; 86— 88; 7. 84. An amulet of parm- 
wood is praised as the strengthener of sovereignty in 3, 5. Quite a number 
of hymns are engaged in securing to a monarch specific qualities befitting 
such a, personage: ‘the strength {varcas) that is in the lion, the tiger, the 
serpent,'' in Agni, the Brahmana, and Surya . . the strength that is in the 
elephant, panther, and in gold; in the waters, cattle, and in men’ (6. 38; cp. 
I* 9; ^9* 37)- To the acquisition of the strength of an elephant [hastivarcas) 
a special hymn, 3. 22, is devoted. Glory {yaia^) is another quality ardently 



III. Contents of the Atharva-Veda in the SaunakIya-School. 75 


bespoken for a king, 6. 39, as also for the Brahmans themselves (6. 58; 69). 
And 6. 61 seems to be a piece of self-glorification on the part of a king (or 
Brahman): it sounds as though it were adapted from, or patterned after a 
hymn representing Indra engaged in self-praise; but it does not occur else- 
where. The hymns to Rohita and RohinI (book 13) are at least related to 
the present class; they represent this pair of divinities allegorically as king 
and queen (see below, S 61), and the terms in which they are exalted reflect 
the praise and adulation of terrestrial monarchs. The ritual connected with 
the royal hymns, as also the rdjasuya in the Srauta-texts, represents the king 
and his Purohita in mutual interdependence'^: without successful purohifi there 
can be no sound ksatra. With pardonable jself-consciousness, considering the 
temper of the times, the Purohita assumes responsibility for the king’s success 
in 3. 19: ‘Keen (sharpened) is this prayer of mine, keen my manly force and 
strength; keen therefore shall be the rule, and imperishable, of him whose 
victorious Purohita lam''. Similarly the* stanza 7. 16. In humbler spirit the 
prose litany 5. 24 contains prayers addressed to the pantheon for success in 
the function of Purohita; and 19. 63 (RV, i. 40. i) is adapted as an exhort- 
afion addressed to a Purohita (Brahmauaspati), to captivate the gods and 
make powerful the king (yajamdna). 

In their extent and vigor, and in their eager exploitation of details 
elsewhere unknown, the war and battle charms of the Athaxvan constitute 
also a decided peculiarity of that Veda". The armament of weapons, snares, 
traps, nets'®, and the stench produced by a rotten rope burned in the fire, 
in order to bewilder and bring to fall the enemy (8. 8), bear the earmarks 
of the Veda of the gkoram. The battle-charms appear generally in pairs, or 
groups of three: i. 19 is a charm against arrow-wounds, followed by i. 20 
and 21, battle-charms in general. The group 6. 65 — 67 is of similar import; 
in the first two the words nirkasta and nairkasta figure prominently: hand- 
less the scheming enemy shall be, his arms shall be broken. Still other groups 
are 3. i, 2, battle songs addressed to Agni to confuse the enemy; 4. 31, 32 
(RV. 10, 84, 83) addressed to Manyu, ^Wrath’, as the victorious spirit of battle 
(cp. 6. 65); 6. 97 — 99, prayers of the king to Agni, Indra, &c. upon the eve 
of battje; 6. 103 — 104 charms to paralyse the enemy {samddna, dcidna). 
Especially fierce and prolongued is the attack upon the foe undertaken with 
II. 9 and 10, addressed to the battle-demons Arbudi, Nyarbudi, and Tri- 
saindhi, who are regarded as allies of Indra. The god Trisamdhi, ‘Three- 
joints’, is evidently a personification of the three-pointed bolt of India (ii. 10.3); 
Arbudi and Nyarbudi are pretty certainly derived firom the myth of the demon 
Arbuda, the cloud-serpent, whom Indra slays: Nyarbudi seems to owe its 
intrinsically meaningless prefix ni to verbal juxtapositions such as, ny arbuHam 
vdvrdMm asta^^ RV. 2. ii, 20 '3 , Henry regards Arbuda as Originally a 
mythic double of Indra; we may preferably suppose that the friendly relation 
of Indra and these secondary precipitates from Arbuda are due to a later 
view of .Arbudi and Nyarbudi as serpent-gods who are by these very terms 
auspicious. The earlier import of the myth has passed out of sight Another 
pair of hymns, 5.20 and 21, representing the better grade of . Athaxvanic 
literary endeavor, are addressed to the battle-drum, the terror of the enemy: 
‘When the wife of the enemy hears the voice of the dram that speaks to a 
far distance, may she, starting up at* the sound, distressed, snatch her child 
to her arms and run, frightened at the clash of arms’. Cp, also 6. 126 (RV. 
6.47. 29 — 31). Still other specialties are dealt with in 19. 20, the prayer 
of a king while putting on his armor (cp. the st 7. 118 «= RV. 6, 75. 18); 
in 6. 125 (RV. 6. 47. 26 — 28) and 7. 3, prayers of a king as he mounts his 



76 II Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 

war-chariot Finally there belong to this class the Atharvan version of the 
famous apraiiraiha-siikia^ 19. 13 (RV. 10,103), and the hymns more vaguely 
redolent of war, 6. 13; 7. 86; 91; 92; 93; 108; and no. 

I See above, S 26; SBE, XLII, p. XL note, Li. — ^ Above, % 33; SBE. XLII, 
p. XXVII, Lxuff. — 3 Weber, SPAW., 1891, p. 7S5— 7; APAW., 1893, p. 4» 23 note, 
143; Bloomfield, SBE. XLII, p. xxvff. ; above, p. 10. — 4 SHE. XLII, p. lv, 
LXiiff.; above, % 26-28. — 5 SBE. XLII, p. 111—133; cp. Weber, IS. X. 26 ff.; 
Ludwig, Der Rig-Veda, III, 248 ff.; Zimmer, p. 158 AT. Cp. the rastrasamvarga- 
hymns, Kaus., p. 299, note 7, — Cp. also the Parisista-like indramahotsava, Kaus. 
140 ; Ath. Paris. 19 (Kausika, Introd. p. xxvi). — 7 See $ 26 ff.; SBE. XLII, 
p. XLViii, LL — 8 Weber, Rajasuya {APAW., 1893), Index, under ‘salbung’, and 
‘tiger-feir. — 9 See RV. 10. 173, and cp. Ludwig, ibid., p. 250; Zimmer, 
162 ff.; SBE. XLII. 331. — ^0 Kaus. 17. 6. 7; Weber, Rajasuya (APAW., 1S93}, p. 4, 
140— .143. — II The Kausika designates the battle-charms as samgramikafti (14*7); 
special varieties are known as apanodanani (14. 14}, and mohanTmi (14, 17). The 
GanamSla, Ath. Paris. 34. 13, presents in the aparajita-gana a similar collection. 
Cp. Svidh. 3. 6, and the terms mohana and sendstambhana in Tantric texts : Weber, 
Verz. I, 270; IT. 1184. — 12 Cp. the indrafdla-vidhana^ WEBER, Verz. L 270, with 
AV, 8. 8. 5—8, — 13 Cp. also RV. i. 51. 6; 2. 14. 4; 8. 32. 3. — i4 SBE. XLII, 
631 ff.; Henry, Les Livres X, XT, et XIT, p. 164 ff. 

S 56. Class 7). Prayers and imprecations in the interest of 
Brahmans. — The claims and prerogatives of the Brahmans^ have reached 
in the AV. their highest pitch_, excepting that the hyperbolic amount.s of live 
stock and other property, reputed to have been given them^ as dakdnd in 
the ddnastuiisy ndrdsamsyahj and the incidental reports of the Srauta-literature, 
is restricted within more reasonable bounds in the numerous daksind-hymm 
of the AV, The Brahmans bestow upon themselves freely the epithet deva 
‘god'^ which is after all perhaps, at least in the beginning, nothing more 
than a bit of awkward logic, derived from the perception .that the sacrifice 
and the priestly reward (iddpurtain) are both sanctified acts which therefore 
must each address themselves to a divine being. They are further fully con- 
scious of being in charge by virtue of their function as Purohitas of the sover- 
eignty of kings and the safety of countries; in addition, all blessings of the 
private folk flow from the Brahmans as the middie-men between the human 
race and the gods. The social and economic conditions of the Brahmanas 
in the AV. are very much the same as those elicited from statements in 
the Srauta-literature such as have been gathered by Weber in his /Collectanea 
on the Castes’, IS. X. i — 160. Especially pronounced is their claim of 
‘inviolability’ (q/y^ata, adad/iyatd^) and the still exorbitant demand of dahim, 
moderate as it seems compared with the lies of the ddnastuti^. The Athar- 
vanic element appears in the former class in the shape of imprecations, fierce 
beyond anything known elsewhere in the literature': oppression and murder 
of Brahmans is the sin against the holy ghost. The hymns describing the 
bestowal of daksind are quite unique: the performances are treated, some- 
times at great length, as independent sacrificial acts delineated with the most 
pains-taking detail; they are correlated with all that is holy or mystic in 
nature and theosophic speculation {brahma). This is one of the marked 
specialties of these hymns: when a goat {aja) is the piece de resistance of a 
dahind it is both goat and the divine Aja Ekapad; when a steer, it is both 
sacrificial animal and divine steer (anaifvdn) Thus it is difficult in individual 
cases to decide whether a theosophic chain — often a jumble — of state- 
ments has been adapted to the dahsind^ or whether the dahsind is the original 
theme, being merely decked out with the familiar mock-profundities of the 
brahma. 

The inviolability of Brahmans and their belongings is the subject of four 
of the most graphic hymns of the AV. (5. 17—19; 12. 5). The first of these 



III. Contents of the Atharva-Veda in the SaunakTya-School. 


77 

occurs fragmentarily in RV. 10.109, which presents only 7 stanzas, but occurs 
in a position in the RV. redaction pointing to a fuller version of ii sts., 
perhaps identical with the first ii sts. of AV. The last. 7 sts. of AV. may 
therefore, as also for intrinsic reasons, be regarded as later than the first 1 1 'h 
The entire hymn is an imprecation against the violator of the wife of a 
Brahman: kings or arrogant nobles (sts. 3, 10) seem to be the culprits in the 
mind of the poet Even king Soma ceded his mythical prerogative as the 
first husband of every woman in favor of the Brahmans, the gods themselves 
conducted the wedding ceremonies. Woe betide the king and country where 
a Brahman’s spouse is injured. Prosperity vanishes, children are not born, 
portentous occurrences terrify the people. The other three hymns 7 are di- 
rected against the oppressors of Brahmans, especially ag.iinst those that rob 
(hvithhold) their cattle'^’: ‘That kingdom verily she (the cow) swamps, as water 
a leaking ship; misfortune smites that kingdom in which they injure a Brah- 
mana. The trees chase away with the words: “do not come within our 
shade”, him that covets the wealth that belongs to a Brahmana, O Narada’ 
(5* 19 - S, 9). The vials of the Brahman’s wrath are not thus emptied; fiercely 
they consign their oppressor to death, accentuating their theme by suggestive 
references to the harrowing details of the funeral-practices: ‘The 
that wipes away the track (of death) which they fasten to the dead, that 
very one, O oppressor of Brahmans, the gods did declare thy couch’ . . . 
‘The water with which they bathe the dead, with which they moisten his 
beard, that very water, O oppressor of Brahmans, the gods did assign to thee 
as thy share of water’ (5. 19, 12, 14). 

'On the positive side the Brahmans assert the importance and power of 
the purohiti (3. 19; 5, 24; 7. 16; 19. 63, above, p. 75). But above all the 
AV., as almost every other phase of Vedic literature pleads not at all 
shame- facedly but with the w^holesome courage of its convictions for the per- 
quisites of the Brahmans. The dmasiuti which narrates fabulous feats of 
giving, doubtless by way of stimulus to future givers, is to be sure almost 
entirely absent In this matter the attitude of the Atharvan is rather pre- 
scriptive or didactic than quasi-historical. Or, the witchery of magic formula 
and prayer is applied, to exorcise avarice and conjure liberality. The pretty 
hymn 5. 7, addressed to the demon ‘Grudge’ {ardti) cajoles her, though she 
be ‘golden-complexioned, lovely, resting upon golden cushions’, quite an 
Apsaras or ‘schoene Teufelinne’ in her fascinations, to go away. Instead, 
‘him whom I implore with Vac Sarasvatl (holy speech), the yoke-fellow of 
thought, Sraddha (faith that expresses itself in works, sc. m daksma) shall find 
to-day, bestowed by the brown Soma’ (st The same result is cra.ved 

in the following rather plaintive ejaculation, showing that even a Brahman 
might be ypYjoiuoauv'^] , x’ etxwv xal oxocpsppi trEviiQ: ‘What king, desirous of 
more possessions, will get us out of this wretched misery? Who is desirous 
of sacrifice, and who of (getting the heavenly reward of) presents (to the 
Brahmans)? Who seeks for long life from the gods?’ (7. 103; cp. 7. 104)^3. 
Within this sphere belongs also 3. ii, a conversation between Varuiia and 
Atharvan (the typical priest) about a wonderful cow bestowed by the former 
upon the latter. Varui^a tries to take it back, but is induced by Atharvan 
to desist Aside from the regular daksjnd ih.t thrifty Brahmans stood ready 
to gather in all sorts of odds and ends. Thus the birth of twin-calves (3. 28), 
contrary to modern superstition which regards animals bom in pairs as 
auspicious, is made -to appear as a portentuous occurrence requiring expiation, 
part of which consists in making over ‘the growling and cross cow that 
injureth the cattle’ to the Brahmans * 3 . A cow which after a certain time is 



78 11. Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brah.mana. 


discovered to be sterile (vasa) is viewed in a similar light: the long anustiibh- 
hymn 12. 4 recounts in picturesque language, accompanied by fierce threats, 
urgent reasons for passing her on to the Brahmans whom nothing hurts. But 
the brunt of the Atharvan^s activity in this line is directed towards the com- 
position of elaborate hymns which are obviously intended to accompany the 
bestowal of substantial daksinas^ and, what is more singular, to elevate the 
ceremonies connected therewith to the position of independent sacral acts of 
great formality and dignity. These daksinds are designated by Kausika as 
sava (savdn dd *to give savas') — the word sava in this sense does not 
occur in the text of the Saixihita; see, however, RV. i. 126. i. The Srauta- 
texts are acquainted with savas which are accounted as forms of the ekdha\ 
they are solemn consecrations {abhiseka) for special ceremonies of consider- 
able variety*^. TB. 2. 7 recounts seven of tiiese, one being styled odanasava 
(2.7.7), performed by an annddyakd 7 na: Kausika specializes this idea altogether 
in the direction of the bestowal of daksind, devoting to his savas the entire 
eighth adhyaya. Two versions of the savas are there presented, one 60 — 66, 
the other in the nature of a Parisista, 67 — 68. Both the sacrificer and his 
wife {paint) participate in the ceremonious details of these performances as 
kartdrau] special utensils {sdvikdh sambhdrdh^ 67. i) are employed. Kesava, 
p. 364, summarizes these ^avas^ stating their number as 22. The most pro- 
nounced type of these appears in the two hymns ii. i and 12.3 which Kes. 
designates respectively as brahmaudana and svargaudana. They represent the 
stanzas chanted at a solemn combination of a soma-sacrifice with the pre- 
paration of porridge for the Brahmans^ daksiiid. Presents of gold and clothes 
II. I. 28; 12. 3. 51) are also hinted at; nevertheless there is something real 
and homely about these performances in which the wife takes part, apd which 
are spoken of (11.1.19) as a practice of long standing in the family : ‘Grand- 
fathers, fathers, children, grandchildren — I am the fifteenth that did cook 
thee (0 porridge)’! They are far removed from the suspicious bluster of the 
ddnasfuti. Allied to these is ii. 3, an allegoric liturgic exaltation of the 
adana^ in Brahmapa-prose: in sts. 50 if. the porridge is assimilated to the sun. 
A goat {aja^ assimilated, as a matter of course, to Aja Ekapad), garnished 
with five odanas {aja pancaudand) is the subject of 9. 5 (cp. 4. 14); a cow, 
accompanied by a hundred odanas {sataudand)^ similarly correlated with the 
pantheistic heavenly cow, is bestowed in 10. 9. An odana whose main motive 
is escape from death {ati tar mi mrtyuni)'^'^ is dealt with in 4. 35; another, 
prepared with succulent sauces and called vistdrin ‘spreader’, is described in 
mystic cosmogonic language as conducive to happiness in the other world. 
And 6. 123 also represents e;jcplicitly the doctrine that presents to the Brahmans 
are a treasure laid up in heaven. Many of these savas centre around an 
animal: xo. 10 a vasd\ 9.4 an rsabha^ assimilated to the various celestial 
bulls (Rohita, Indra, Tva^tar, etc.); 4, ii (adapted secondarily) an anajvdn; 
7.22, corrupt and unintelligible formulas occurring elsewhere go-sava; 
6. 3ij a hymn to the rising sun {gauU prinilj)^ z. printsava\ 3. 29. i — 6 an 
avi-sava^ followed in sts. 7, 8 by a pray audita to expiate for its acceptance 
(IS. 10. 55); 6. 30. I, in praise of grain (7<3:z^^) mixed with honey, is called 
pamaJ^dia madkamanika (Kaui. 66. 15). Kesava’s list of 22 savas exhibits 
yet other hymns and stanzas recited, at times quite secondarily, in connection 
with daksind: e. g. i. 31, a prayer to the regions of space {dMh) for health 
and prosperity, at a caiukiardva-sava (Kaus. 64. i). Decidedly the most 
interesting of ail these dak^inas is depicted in 9. 3 {dUdsava)\ a house is 
gradually taken apart; like a living thing it is handled very gingerly during 
the process; then it is made over to the Brahman who receives it with solemn 




Ill Contents of the Atharva-Veda in the SaunakIya-School. 79 

prayers for his own future well-being in it, and finally takes it to his own 
place of residence Of importance also is the distinct presence of the 
notion, more or less like those of the Dharmasastras etc., that the gift of water 
to Brahmans, either independently, or as part of a more substantial daksina, 
is a holy act: 6. 122 (10. 9. 27; ii. i. 17, 27)^®. The occasional squeamish- 
ness of the Brahmans which arises from the feeling that they are too much 
*on the make’, or are receiving improper gifts, gains expression in the expia- 
tory prayer 6. 71, or in the formulas 3. 29, 7, 8; cp. Weber’s collections, IS. 
10. 55ff. 

The chapter of the greed and self-assertion of the Brahmans is relieved 
considerably here, as throughout Brahmanical literature, by opposite currents 
of thought and feeling. The redemptory note of their character is their con- 
sciousness of noblesse oblige. A Brahman must be well-regarded among men 
and therefore well-qualified for his holy office. Two prayers (6. 58 and 69) 
signalize their craving for the esteem of men^^ To gain this end they must 
be wise, illumined, spiritually pure, firmly rooted in holy learning. Very pro- 
perly then the famous hymn ahain rudrehhir.^ in praise of Vac, 4. 30 (RV. 
10. 125), even in modern times one of the mainstays of the samnydsin^ is 
employed in a rite to beget wisdom, or at the study of the Vedas More 
directly 6. 108 (cp, RVKh. 10. 151) is an explicit prayer for ‘wisdom’; 
19. 4 for dkuti ‘perception’; 19. 41 — 43 are prayers for brahma ‘spiritual 
elevation’, and dlksd ‘consecration’; and 19. 64 is a prayer for wisdom and 
other more worldly advantages on the part of a Brahmacarin as he builds 
the hre. Related with these, though of a more general character, are three 
prayers for purification, 6. 19; 51; and 62. Devotion to Vedic learning®^ is 
at the base of such compositions as 7. 105 and 19. 68, stanzas introductory 
to the teaching of the Veda; 7. 54 and 7. 61, prayers for success in the study 
of the Veda; 7. 66 and 67, prayers for regaining holy learning; and 19. 71, 
the praise of the gdyatri^^. Cp. also the very late matter 19.21 — 23 (S 3 7? 
note 14). The opening hymn of the Samhita (i. i) is a prayer to Vacaspati, 
the ‘lord of speech’, for comprehension and retention of the sruta^ the holy 
learning following in the Samhita: ‘the thrice seven (sounds or syllables) 
wearing all forms, their powers the lord of speech shall make mine to-day’ 

A similar stanza at the end of book 19 (72) contains a blessing at the con- 
clusion of this Veda, confirming the theory of the late and secondary char- 
acter of book 20 (S 3S). 

I SBE. XLII. i 69“--19S, and the notes thereto; cp. Weber, IS. X. iff.; Lud- 
wig, Der Rig-Veda, III. 268 ff.; Zimmer, 168 ff., 195 ff. — 2 aV, 3. 3. 26; 6. 13. I; 
58. 2; n. 1. 23; 12. 3. 38: cp. Weber, IS. 10. 35 ff.; above, p. 3. — 3 Weber, 
1. c., p. 60 ff.; Zimmer, 197 ff. — 4 Weber, ib., p. 53; SPAW., 1891, p. 771; below 
% 63, end. - — 5 AV. 4. 1 1 ; cp. Jacob, Concordance to the Upanishads, s. v. am-- 
4 uh. — 6 Oldenberg, Die Hymnen des Rig-Veda, p. 240 ff. — 7 St. I of 5. 19 
occurs with variants JB. I. 152; the hymn 12. 5 is mixed prose and quasi-poetry. 
Cp. Svidh. I. 6. — 8 Hence 5. 18 and 19 are designated as brahmagavli Kau§. 48. 
I3 ff. ^ 9 Roth, Festgruss an Bohtlingk, p. 98—99, quotes a similar Hellenic 
custom from Antoninus Liberalis 23; cp. SEE. ^ XLII. 436. — Cp. RV. I, 1 25. 
4 — yj and 8. 31. — Excepting the «drff/a?;L7-stanzas of the kimtapahijrm. 20. 
127. 1—3. — 12 SBE. XLII. 172, 423 ff-; Bloomfield, AJPh. XVII. 411; Olden- 
berg, ZDMG. L. 42311. The little hymn 7. 57 seems also a charm to secure 
daksina (cp. prnad ghrimd)^ but it appears to have been adapted secondarily from 
another sphere* — Bloomfield, AJPh. XVII. 408 ff. — 14 Roth, Abhandlung, 
p. I ;,Muir,,OST, D. 395; cp. AV. 7. ,104. — 15 Kau^. 109— HI. —• Pet. Lex., 
s. V. sava\ SS., Index, s. v. savd', Hillebrandt,, Ritual-Litteratur, p. 140. — lyKau^., 
atimriyu\ Kes. and Say. aiimrtyusava. — vSV. I- 45^; ApS. 21.9. 1$; FB. 4- 9-4 5 
Svidh. I. 6. 2; 3. I. 4; Kmis. 66, 14; Vait. 13. 8^ — xg SBE. XLIL I93ff., 593 ff* 
— . 20 Cp. Manu 3. 244; 4, 229; 6. 7; 9. T68, 186; Xarada 5. 41; Sakuhtals, ^loka 
155 (ed. Bohtlingk). — 21 This is the Aomdiw oi yas as and brahmavarcasUf IS. X. 



8o IL Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahman^x. 


10$ ff.; Svidh. 2. 7, — 22 Kaiis. 10. 16; 139. 15 — > 25 Cp. IS. X. in fT. — 24 The 

MSS. read vedamdid for which the vulgate substitutes vandamand. Sayana, gayairj. 

Cp. GB. I. 1. 38, end. — 25 WiutnEy, Festgruss an Roth, p. 94. Cp. Kaiis. Index B, 

p. 385, under visvakarma. 

§ 57. Class 8). Charms to secure prosperity and freedom from 
danger (pau.stikani). — In a sense the entire Veda is a long-drawn cry for 
prosperity, beginning with the word ratnadhdtama^ RV. i. x. 1, and running 
through almost every hymn and ceremony. The province of the Atharvan u 
to provide for individual desires and special exigencies, very much in the 
manner of the kdmyesti of the Srauta-literature, and in a measure also of the 
Grhya-literature but to an extent and with a degree of thoroughness else- 
where unknown. Nowhere does the exceeding practicality of Vedic literature 
appear in a stronger light. In the later systematization this type of activity 
receives the name pysjikarina { paustikd?ii karmdni) a pendant to bhemja 
and abhiedra^ terms that are also in the main precipitates from the Atharvan 
literature. House and home, held and river, grain and rain, cattle and horses, 
trading and gambling, journeying and returning, serpents and vermin, furnish 
the special themes for these prayers and charms. And over it all is the still 
more persistent outcry after wealth and progeny; exemption and protection 
from calamity and danger^. Such is the impression gained from this class 
which, barring the 20*^^ book, forms rather more than one fifth of the hymns 
of the Samhita. We may follow conveniently the order indicated above in 
the brief characterization of the materials herein concerned. 

The rite of house-building is represented by 3. x 2, stanzas of whicli, occur 
in almost all the Grhya-sutras in connection with the same practice h A certain 
accessory ceremony called syenaydga or ^yenejydy unearthed by the present 
writers, takes place in connection with 7.41. The hymn is addressed to the 
divine eagle (lightning): according to the commentators at Ivans. 43. 3 the 
ceremony is performed on the ground upon which a new house is to be 
built, or within the new house after its completion, its purpose being to fore- 
fend untoward circumstances. Apparently the house shall not be struck by 
lightning: ‘the eagle looking for a resting-place shall come hither kindly 
{sivd) together with his friend Indra’. Other charms to conciliate the ‘goddess 
lightning’ and to cause her to spare the stores of grain, are i. 13 and 7. ii. 
Protection from conflagrations is secured by means of 6. 106, accompanied 
by significant practices with water-plants and a frog^ whereas 3. 21 more 
broadly aims to cpiet the destructive force of all sorts of fires, especially the 
funeral-fire. A charm for conducting a river into a new channel, 3, 13, is 
built up upon six stanzas of a general character, in praise of the waters; the 
seventh stanza points in the direction of the underlying practices: Kaus. 40. 
X — 6 adds exceedingly interesting details'. The field is ploughed while reciting 
the very composite hymn 3. 17, which is supported by further mantras and 
significant^ practices in Kaus. 20. (cp. RV. 4, 57). The little hymn to Indra 
6. 33 (SS. 18. 3. 2 with variants) is also prescribed, Kuui 23. 17, at a 
ploughing ceremony; it is followed by a blessing over the seed as it is being 
sowed, 6. 142. Charms to procure abundance or increase of grain are 3.24 
and 6. 79, the latter with notable variants, TS. 3.3*8, 2 — 3; the very original 
hymn 6. 50 exorcises the vermin which infests the grain in the field. Of 
charms to secure rain, that greatest desideratum of the Hindu agrarian, there 
are three: 4. 15; 6. 22; and 7. 18; of these the first contains original mater- 
ials, and is partly in close touch with the frog-hymh, RV. 7, 103, also a 
rain-charm ^ Quite common are charms connected with cattle: 2**26 ; 3. 14: 
4, 21; and 7. 75, to secure prosperity of cattle; 6. 59, a prayer to the plant 



EH. Contents of the Atharva-Veda in the SaunakIya-School. 8i 


arundhati for the protection of cattle. The three sts. 4. 38. 5 — 7, designated, 
Kaiii 21, II, as karkJpravaddh (sc. rca^^ according to the scholiast ensure 
the prosperity of cattle: we have interpreted them more particularly as a 
prayer to secure the return of calves that have strayed to a distance^. Of 
special interest are 6. 70, a charm to secure the attachment of a cow to her 
calf; 6. 1 41, a prayer pronounced while marking the ears of cattle (cp. 12. 
4. 6)^®; and 4. 3, a very forceful shepherds, charm against wild beasts and 
robbers (tiger, man, wolf, and serpent). The time-honored love for racing 
gains expression in 6. 92, a charm to endow a horse with fleetness: the 
stanzas seem to have originated in connection with the z?4/«^^^<2-ceremony^%* 
similarly perhaps 19. 25. Trading and travelling are closely allied: 3.15 is 
a lively merchants prayer to Tndra the merchant’ for a safe journey and 
abundant gain; 6. 55; 7. 8; and 7. 55 are stanzas adapted as prayers for a 
safe journey; and the rather indefinable mixtum compositum 5. 6 seems to 
be an oracle to find out whether one will survive a journey On returning 
from a journey there is the prayer, 7. 60, to the house, to remove from it 
fear of the owner, and to make it prosperous Of especial interest is 
6. 128, the propitiation of the weather-prophet who predicts the weather for 
a person about to start on a journey (Kaus. 50. 15, 16): ‘When the stars 
made Sakadhuma (he who predicts the weather from the smoke of burning 
dung) their king, they bestowed gpod weather upon him: ‘‘This shall be his 
dominion”, they said’. Whether Sakadhuma is really originally the human 
weather-prophet or some mythical conception is not to be made out with 
certainty ^4. The special danger besetting both traveller and householder in 
India are serpents: 6.56 seems to be an exorcism of serpents from the prem- 
ises; whereas the so-called dig-yukte {sc.sUkU)^ 3. 26 and 27, seem to have 
in mind the danger from serpents when abroad, as they mention all directions 
of the compass Especially noteworthy is 10.4, a long charm against serp- 
ents, invoking the white horse of Pedfi, probably the horse of the sun in 
practice an insect that has come by the name of Paidva is substituted for 
the unattainable horse (Kaus. 32. 20 E). The hymn 7. 9, mixed stanzas ad- 
dressed to Pusan makes up a charm for finding lost property; and there 
are finally three or four prayers for success in gambling at dice, 4. 38. i — 4; 
7.50; 7.109; and perhaps also 2. 2, addressed especially to Apsara (Apsaras) 
who otherwise also bears an unsavory reputation: the passion for gambling 
is quite as fierce as it is depicted in the classical complaint of the gambler 
who would reform, RV. 10. 34. 

The remaining hymns of this class are more general in character, divisible 
into two classes: one designed to procure health, wealth, and prosperity; the 
other to ward off danger and calamity. Three hymns, 1.15; 2.26; and 19. i, 
centre about the so-called sdnisrdvya havis^ an oblation which secures the 
‘flowing together’ of all possible wealth*^ (see S 60, end); the hymns 4 - '^31 
7 ^ 6 g; 19. 9— -ii are prayers for sam ‘prosperity’; the prose formulas 4. 39, 
known as samnats'^^, are designed to bend the heavenly powers to one’s 
desire for all the good things of life; the st 7. 24 is a prayer to the gods 
to engage personally in procuring prosperity; 1.31 is a prayer to the regions 
of space for health and prosperity; i, 32 and 6. 10 are cosmic stanzas or 
formulas similarly designed; 3. 16 (RV, 7. 41) and 3. 20 (RV. 10. 141), ad- 
dressed to Agni^ are morning prayers for prosperity; similar is the purpose of 
19. 55. The udunihara 4 xt^ furnishes an amulet to secure prosperity, 19. 31. 
The members of the Vedic pantheon are called upon individually to furnish 
prosperity, the stanzas freciuently coinciding with those of other texts, with 
the presumption in favor of their origin outside of the AV.: India in 19. 5 



8 2 IL Literature and History, ib. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahm an a. 


(RV. 7. 27. 3); Agni in 7. 82 and, 19. 3 (TB. i. 2. i. 21 if.); Agni Vaisvanara 
in 6. 35^ and 36 (AS. 8. ii. 4; SS. 10. 9. 17; SV. 2. 1058— 60J; Savitar in 

6. I (AS- 8. I. 18), 7. 14 (SV. I. 464 c), and 7. 15 (MS. 2. 10. 6); Usas in 

19. 12 (RV. 10. 172. 4, and 6, 17. 15); Sarasvat! in 7. 68 (MS, 4. 12. 6); 
Sarasvant in 7. 40 (TS. 3. i. ii. 3); the divine eagle in 7.39 (RV. 1.164.52}; 
T^irlirya Aristanemi in 7. 85 (RV. 10. 17S, i); the devajfainyaii in 7.49 (RV. 
5. 46. 7, 8J. Especially the personified phases of the moon^ amdvdsyd^ pau- 
rnamdsi^ darsa (7. 79— Si), and the female genii of these phases, Anmnati 
(7.20), Sinlvall (7.46), Kuhu (7-47)) B.aka (7.48)^°, are implored for wealth 
and, especially, offspring; the very late hymns 19. 7, 8 engage the favor of 

the constellations {naksatrd)^'^\ finally the hymn 3.10 to Ekastaka, a personi- 

fied lunar day near the beginning of the year^^, viewed as the wife, or 
epitomized equivalent of the year, is implored to make the year prosperous. 

The hymns designed to ward off calamity and danger exhibit many 
points of contact with the charms against witchcraft, as well as with the 
battle-charms, sorcery and war being conspicuous sources of danger. Of these 
the most notable are the group 4.23 — 29, known as the 7nrgdrdni, or mrgdra- 
suktdnP^. They were obviously compiled by the Atharvanist for purification 
and against misfortune: the refrain contains throughout the expression muc 
ainhasa^ ^release from misfortune’. The hymns are a curious expansion of 
the so-called mrgdresii of the Yajus-texts^^, to which they are unquestionably 
secondary (see $ 45). The first and the last stanzas of most of these hymns 
are derived from the Yajus; the intervening stanzas are padding. Only 4. 28 
does not seem to occur in the Yajus at all; the theme, prayer to Bhava and 
Sarva, marks it as Atharvanic by distinction (cp. ii. 2): these gods were not 
to be omitted from such an appeal to the pantheon. Note also the contents: 
krtydkrt and mulakrt in st. 6; kimidin in st 7. Very similar to the mygardni^ 
and having the same refrain, is ii. 6, a prayer for deliverance from calamity, 
addressed to the pantheon: the clear and fairly complete list of divinities, 
very much on the plain of the Yajus-texts, imparts to the hymn its chief 
interest; cp. also i. 26; 6. 3, 4, 7; 7. 112. The divinity to whom this class 
of prayers is addressed most frequently is Rudra (Siva-Agni), under the large 
variety of names of embodiments {yniirii) customary with that divinity -5, in 
addition to 4. 28 the long prayer ii. 2, tP Bhava and Sarva, tv/o of the 
embodiments of Rudra, is conspicuous for its intensity; cp. also 6.93 and 7.87. 
Other divinities .and personifications are occasionally appealed to individually: 
Agni Samtapana in 6. 76; personified Death by weapons wielded by Brahmans 
{da)u)y K^atriyas, Vaisyas, etc. in 6. 13"^"; Soma, the slayer of demons, in 6.7; 
Aditi, the universe, and therefore the universal protector, in 7. 6 (cp. 7. 7}; 
Night, the protector against the robbers, wild animals, and demons that infest 
her, in the late hymns 19. 47 — 49 (cp. RV. 10. 127}; and the shallow though 
characteristic personifications Visvajit, Trayamaija, Kalyaui, and Sarvavid in 
the prose-formulas 6. 107. In the manner of the mrgdra-)xymm^ which accent- 
uate the idea of release from calamity {muc amhasaf^yT^ other hymns employ 
other qatch-words to gain similar results: the word aMaya/ixtQdoxn from 
danger’®® is the keynote of 6.40; 19.14 and 15 (followed ’by similar trashy 
matter in 19, 17 — ^19); the hymn 4. 33 (RV. i. 97, et al) with its refrain, 
apa Mmad agAam, the so-called figures as a matter of 

course; the prose-formulas 5. 10 harp upon the word amavanm ^protection 
firm as stone’, being exploited practically in that sense Kaui 5, 14^°. Finally 
there is to be mentioned the singular charm i. 27 in which danger is warded 
off by an amulet made from the skin of a moulting serpent, the serpents in 
this condition symbolizing the powerless enemy. The amulet is homoeopathic. 



in. Contents oe* the Atharva-Veda in the SaunakIya-School. 83 


as it were*^^. The hymns to the waters (see § 50, end), though very general 
in character, are also in close touch with this class. 

^ See the list of the kamya i^tayah in Weber’s edition of the TS., voL II, 
P* 343 J Oldenberg, SBE. XXX, p. 303 ff., 306. Cp, Meyer, Rig-vidhana, Introd., 
p. xu; Svidh. 3. i ff. — 2 Cp. Hillebrandt, Ritual-Litteratur, p. 169. 3 SBE. 

XLII, p. 140 — 162, and the notes on these hymns. — 4 See Oldenberg’s citations, 
SBE. XXX, p. 303, bottom; cp. Hillebrandt, I. c., p. 80.— 5 JAOS. XVLl2ff.; 
cp. CoLEBROOKE, Essays I. 319. — 6 Contributions. Second Series, AJPh. XL 34.2 ff.; 
SBE. XLII, p. 147, 5 14 ff. — 7 SBE. XLII, p. 146, 348 ff. — 8 Hillebrandt, GGA., 
1889, p. 406; Bloomfield, JAOS. XVII. i73ff. Cp. RV. 7. loi— 105; 10. 98, and 
the hymns to Parjanya in general. — 9 SBE. XLII, p. 150, 413. — ^0 Delbruck, 
Gurupujakaumudi, p. 48. — Weber, SPAW., 1892, p. 788; Bloomfield, SBE. 
XLII, p. 508. — *2 Cp. Kaus, 15. 12; 18. 27; the hymn is especially related to 
ApS. 16. 18. 7 ff. — 13 A number of these stanzas occur in the Grhya-sutras and 
elsewhere; cp. in general Kau^. 89. 12. — H Seven Hymns, AJPh. VII. 484 ff.; 
SBE. XLII, p. 160, 532 ff. — J5 Cp. the so-called sarpakuti, TS. 5. 5. 10. i — 5; 
MS. 2. 13. 21; ApMB. 2. 17; Weber, IS. XVn. 291 ff. — Weber, IS. I. 292; 
Bergaigne, La Religion Vedique, IL 451— 2, 498; SBE. XLII. 1 5 2, 605 ff. — 
17 RV. 10. 17. 6, 5, and 6.54.9, lo. — 18 Ludwig, Der Rig-Veda, III. 371; Hille- 
brandt, Ritual-Litteratur, p. 114. — *9 See % 54, note 8. — 20 Cp. Kani. 1.29,30; 
GB. 2. I- ro. — 21 Nak§atrakalpa lo presents them in full, not by pratika, showing 
that these pieces did not figure in the Saunakiya-Samhits at the time of the com- 
pilation of the Naksatrakalpa. — 22 Weber, IS. XVII. 218 ff.; Hillebrandt, Ritual- 
Litteratur, p. 94. — 23 Kaul 9. i; 27 34; cp. also 32. 27, note. The vroidmr^dra 
seems to be from marj ‘purify’, but that is not certain. Cp. the mrgdra-vrata^ KeL 
to Kaus. 42. 12 ff.; Ath. Paddh. to KauA 57. 32. — 24 TS. 4. 7. 15; MS. 3. i6. 5 ; 
cp. IS. 111.395. — 25 Most of the others appear in the hymn incidentally; cp. SBE. 
XLII. 618. — 26 Closely related, of course, to the battle-charms, and employed in 
that function, KauA 14. 25; 15. 6. — 27 See Kausika, Index B, under, amkolmgdh 
(p, 383). — 28 See ibid. — 29 See ibid. — 30 Read, sraktisu ^pary with Bu. for 
sraktipi pary in Kau§. ; cp. the parallel formulas Kaus. 49. 7 ff* — Weber, IS. 
IV. 421 ; cp. SBE. XLII, Index, under ‘homoeopathy’. 

S 58. Class 9). Charms in expiation of sin and defilement 
(prayascittani). — The Hindu conceptions of sin are very complex. Not 
only is sin an individual, conscious act in violation of the laws of the gods 
and the universe, but it exists as an independent morbid substance or entity 
which may fasten itself upon man without his conscious participation, or at 
least without his choice or sanction. In this sense sin or enas^ pd^man, 
etc., assume the character of an almost physical deficiency or disease. Sin, 
too, is transferable from man to man, from father to son, yea from gods to 
men; the sin of the gods plays no mean part in endangering the peace of 
men^: e. g. in 6. in. 3 mania is produced by sins of the gods. He who is 
seized by sin {pdpmagrhlta) is deprived of his strength by Indra and held 
captive in Varuna’s toils (TS. 2. 3. 13). Personal defects and mishaps, evil 
dreams, aspersion of one’s character, ominous and portentous occurrences in 
the sphere within which one lives, or in nature about one, and, fortiare^ 
irregularities and mishaps in the course of religious ceremonies are conceived 
as closely allied, and confluent with sin and personal offences; they all re- 
quire expiation, correction, or cure: prdyascitti or prdyaJcitta^. Neither of 
these words occur in the E.V., the former only once in AV. 14. i. 30, but 
expiatory stanzas are common throughout the mantra-literature 5 . They are 
supported moreover by countless practices in the Srauta-texts in connection 
with faults in the sacrifice^, or in die kdmyd zstayak oi persons attacked by 
sin, calumny, and misfortune 5 ; in the extensive sections on prdyasdtta in the 
dkarma-ttxXs; in the Grhya-sfitras, where they are not very common^; and 
in theVidhana-textsL A special variety of namely those connected 

with omens and portents {adhhutd)^ has passed through a somewhat independent 
development, so as to assume the character of a special and extensive class 

6 ^ 



84 n. Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahman\a.. 


of literature; the mo^t notable compositions of this sort are the 13^^ book of 
the Kausika and the so-called Adbhuta-Brahmana (SB. 5)®. 

More than 40 hymns of the AY. are devoted to this class of subjects "’j 
quite a considerable part of them covering a single tract, 6. no — 121. It 
is worthy of note that these hymns, with the exception of 6. 114 and per- 
haps also 19. 59, do not expressly deal with prayamtias for defects in the 
sacrifice. The late Gopatha-Brahmana in whose view the fourth priest at a 
Yedic sacrifice, the so-called Brahman, must be an Atharvavedin, repeatedly 
assigns to him ex officio the correction of blunders in the ritual, the saindhdna 
of what is virista^^. Nevertheless prdyascitta-m2Si\x2C& that pertain directly to 
the events of the ritual, such as those of Yait 12. 8, 9; GB. i. 2. 7, are pre- 
sented by these texts in sakalapdtha^ and do not occur in the Samhita, which 
in this as in all other respects touches but lightly upon the sphere of the 
/r^Z2^/a-practices, although it does not fail entirely to take cognizance of them 
(see below S 60). That ritualistic prdyascitta became later very prominent 
in the Atharvan schools we may gather from the existence of the unpublished 
six prdyascitta-d£i'^^ttx% of the Vaitana”. The largest number of these hymns 
address themselves in general terms to the expiation and consequent release 
from sin, frequently cataloguing a variety of misdemeanors, but not specifying 
what particular one it is that burdens the conscience; identical or similar 
stanzas frequently recur in the other Samhitas, most especially in TA. 2. 3 — 6. 
Thus 6. 45 (cp. RV. 10. 164) is in expiation of mental delinquency {marias- 
papa); 6. 26 is directed against pdpman, ^eviP, personified as a Hhousand- 
eyed immortaP; 6.115 against sin, this time called enas; 6 , ii() and 120 are 
prayers to Agni Vaisvanara for remission of sins and ultimate paradise; 6.121 
aims at release from Varu^a’s fetters of sin. Three of these hymns 6. 117 — 
ir9 harp upon the word rm ^debt’, carrying with it the notion of debts in- 
curred, but not paid; especially 6.1 18, addressed to the two Apsaras suggests 
gambling-debts. Another, 6. 116, exhibits a conscience afflicted by the sin of 
sorcery-practice, yady dmam cakrur nikhanania^L'^^. The boundary-line between 
sin and misfortune (nirrdj is evanescent: hymns like 6. 63 and 84 do not 
differ much in spirit and diction from the preceding. Similarly curses from 
the outside and sin are correlated in 7.65 and 112, and the rather obscure stanza 
7. 43, rubricated Kaus. 46. i in a practice to avert calumnious accusation, 
may also be of this sort. Also the general purificatory charms, 6. 19; 51; 
and 62 (above § 56, end), contain certain touches of expression which ally 
them to this sphere. Frequently, on the other hand, the fault requiring 
prdyakiita is stated more or less clearly: 6. 114 seems to be an expiatory 
formula to correct imperfections in the sacrifice (cp. 19. 59); 7. 106 is a 
prayer to Agni to forgive sins due to forgetfulness (in religious matters); 
19. 40 seems to be the prdyascitta of one consecrated for the soma-sacrifice 
(dlksita) who has committed a disturbing fault (anger;; 7. 66 and 6.7 seem 
to be prayers for regaining one^s holy learning {brdhmanam), perhaps after 
it has been lost through some sin; 7. r 02 is a prdyakitta for urinating while 
standing erfect, addressed to the offended deities (jx-fjo’ dvt* YjeXtou Tetpap- 
pdvoc Spdk Hes. Erga, v. 727); cp. 13. j, 56. The obscure mixtum 

compositum, 6. 49, is recited Kaui 46. 14 by a Brahmacarin at the death of 
his teacher, whereas ApS. 14. 29. 3 puts the first two stanzas in the mouth 
of a dlksita who has fallen from grace {yadi dlkdto 'vakirei) That the 
receipt of gifts by the Brahmans is occasionally looked upon as an act re- 
quiring penance (3. 29. 7, 8; 6. 71; 7. 57) has been shown above (S 56). 
Related with these last is 2. 35 (TS. 3. 2. 8. 3; MS. 2. 3. 8), an expiatory 
hymn recited to atone for the sin of depriving them that are justly 



Ill Contents of the Atharva-Veda in the SaunakIya- School. 85 


entitled to it of their share of food. Thus in TS. at the sattra^ when all 
participants are entitled to daksina^ but do not receive it'h See the 
stanza about the kevalMin whose food is in vain {mogkam amam, TB. 
2. 8. 8. 3); or sinful (agAa, Manu 3. 118). In Kaui 38. 22 the hymn is 
recited by one who eats alone in company, in defence against the evil eye 
of those that do not participate. The slaughter of cattle is constantly looked 
at askant by the Hindus; hence every bloody sacrifice is overlaid with the 
fiction that the proper execution of the animal can be performed without 
injury to it, and even with its consent's. The hymn 2. 34 is in the nature 
of an atonement for a sacrifice in which the victim is conceived as in reality 
ransomed .from death, and following the sinless sacrificer to heaven One of 
the greatest crimes of ancient India, affecting both injurer and injured, is the 
precedence of the younger brother before the older on various solemn 
occasions in life, especially in the matter of marriage (j>ari vid). Two hymns, 
6. 1 12 and 113, atone for this sort of sin, which, like sundry others, is looked 
upon as having originated with the gods who %iped it off’ on their scape- 
goat, the god Trita, by whom it was in turn passed on to men ^7. 

But, as stated before, the notion of expiation extends also to circum- 
stances inherent or accidental which cannot and do not involve personal 
responsibility. Here expiation assumes the character of cure or correction of 
inauspicious conditions and accidents, naturally broaching upon the domain 
of hhesaja ‘cure’*®. The conception of the goddess Nirrti ‘misfortune’ (6.63 
and 84) is founded largely upon these ideas * 9 . Thus 7. 115 is a charm for 
the removal of evil characteristics {pdpi laksnil) and the acquisition of 
auspicious ones {puny a laksmt)\ cp. i. 18. The puzzling composite stanzas 
6.30.2, 3 are prescribed, Kaus. 31. i, for one whose hair has been cut by a 
sami and one who has evil characteristics {samilunapdpalaksunayofj), . St. 2 
seems to allude to drunkenness which might cover the ground of papalaksami 
the sami would then appear in' some way responsible for drunkenness, or 
perhaps merely the drunken dishevelled appearance of him whose hair has 
been cut with an instrument of iaml\ st. 3 seems to be addressed to such 
an instrument, used for hair-cutting. It is implored not to harm the hair, in 
the manner in which the razor {ksurcP) is elsewhere addressed (8. 2. 17). The 
juxtaposition , of the two sts. may be merely redactorial, due to the occurrence 
of sami dxA keia in each; their metres are different Atonement for personal 
mishaps is the motive also of 6. no, a prdyascitta for a child bom under an 
unlucky star; and 6. 140 for the irregular appearance of the first pair of 
teeth (see $53, end). Again the birth of twins or the appearance of a 
sterile cow in the herd (3. 28; 12. 4) require their own peculiar atonements 
(S Sd): they belong to the domain of adbhuta (omens and portents). Of this 
sort also are the so-called sdkuna^ charms against pigeons, owls, and other 
black birds whose appearance or contact forebodes evil, or defiles: 6. 27 — 29 
(RV. 10. 165), and 7. 64^*; and similarly 6. 124, recited by one who has 
been struck ominously from above (water from heaven, or fruit from a tree) ; 
cp. TS. 3. I. I. 2. Finally there belong here the charms against evil dreams, 
or nightmares, 6. 46; 7. 23; 100; loi; 16. 5ff.; 19. 56; 57, as also sundry 
stanzas (e. g. 10. 3. 3) scattered throughout the Samhita^^ 

X SBE. XLII. 59, 82, 293, 520, 521, 581, 604. 2 Stenzl^, On the Hindu 

doctrine of expiation, Proc. Second International Congress of Orientalists, p. 22 1 5 
Burnell, Ssmavidhanabrahmana, p. xx; Hardy, Vedisch-Brahmanische Periode, 
p. 189; Oldenberg, Religion des Veda, p. 2S7 ff., 3^7 ff-; Konow, Samavidhana- 
brahmana, p. 4; Jolly, Kecht und Sitte, p. iis ff. ; Hillebrandt, Ritual-Litteratur, 
p.- i66. — 3 E. g. RV. 7. 89. 5; 10. 164. SrVS. 20. 14—16; TS. 3. 3- S. i; MS. 
4. 14. 17; TB. 2. 4. 4. 3; and especially the mantras connected with the so-called 



86 IL Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


ku^mandahoma^ TA. 2. 3—6. These kusmd^tda are used later to an enormous extent, 
espedaily in the dharma^ttylSf e. g, Vas. Dh. 22. 9; Vis. Dh. 86. 22; Gant Dh. 19. 12 ; 
Baudh. Dh. 3. 10. 10; Mann 8. 106; Yajhav. 3. 304; Laghu-Atri Dh. 2. 4; Vrddha-Atri 
Dh. 3. II ; Vi-ddha-Harlta Dh. 8. 270, etc., cp. MG. 2. 14. 27. — 4 See the references, 
Hillebrandt, 1 . c. — ■ 5 Cp., e. g., the pdpmajtd grhlmye§ti^ TS. 2. 3. 13; the 
abhuasfisil^ TS. 2. 2. 5. I; the yajnavibhrastesti, TS. 2.3. 3. 1—2. — 6 See Oldenberg, 
SBE. XXX. 307, for the citations, — 7 Rig-vidhana, Meyer’s Introduction, p. xui; 
under santik; Svidh. I. 2 IT. — 8 Weber, Omina und Portenta, APAw., 1859; Hat- 
field, The Au§anasadbhutani, JAOS. XV. 207 ff. (with bibliographical notices in the 
foot-note on p. 208, and parallels from classical sources on p. 220)1 Hillebrandt, 
ibid. p. 182. — 9 SBE. XLII. 163—- 168, and the notes on these hymns; Ludwig, 
Der Rig-Veda, III. 442 ff. — I. i. I 4 > 22, etc. Cp. M, Muller, HAST. 

p.450; Bloomfield, SBE. XLII,p.LXXi; cp- below, % 67 end, and ff. — - See Garbe, 
in the preface to the edition of the text, p. 5; Weber, Verz. II. 83; Kausika, 
Introduction, p. XXXiii. These chapters are probably identical with the Yajha- 
praya^cittasutra, called Vaitayana, Eggeling, Catalogue, nr. 367; cp. Hillebrandt, 
Ritual-Litteratur, p. 36, note, i; and above, p. 16. — ^2 Ti^e padapatha erroneously, 
fdd ydmdm etc. (there is no oxjionQ ydmd)% the passage means, *if they have made 
a spell of an unburned (vessel) digging it down’. See 5. 31.1, and cp. SBE. XLII. 
45 y, — 13 cp- PG. 3. 12. — ydvanio vai sadasyas te sarve daksinyas, t^bkyff yo 
dakpndm na nayed aibhyo vrscyeia, yad vaisvakarmanani juhoti sadasyan €t/a iai prlndii 
(cp. Ludwig, Der Rig-Veda, V. 601). — *5 Contributions. Sixth Series, ZDMG. XLVIIL 
556. — 16 Roth, Abhandlung, p. 14; Weber, IS. XIII. 207; Ludwig, ibid. III. 433. 
Cp. the similar hymn AVP. « Vait. 10. 17 (GB. i. i. 12). — *7 Contributions. 
Seventh Series, AJPh. XVH. 430 flf. ; SBE, XLIL 164, 52 1 ff. — Cp. Darila to Kau 5 . 
31. 1 (note 8). — 19 Cp. the mrriikarmdnlf Kau 5 . 18. — Ludwig, ibid. Ill 512 ; Zimmer, 
60, 274; and Florenz, BB. XIL 288, do not throw light upon the situation. — 
2 * Adbhuta-Brahmapa 6 and 8 (SB. 5 * Hultzch, Prolegomena zu des 

Vasantaraja &kuna; SBE. XLII. 474. — See Kaul, Index B, p. 384., s. v. 
duJ^svapnandsandni) SBE. XLIL 484, and. Index, p. 697, under ‘dreams’ ; Rig-vidh5na, 
Introduction, p. XIII ipnfauUa somnia), 

% 59, Class 10). Cosmogonic and theosophic hymns. — The presence 
in the AV, of a considerable number of cosmogonic-theosophic hymns*, marking 
in a way the extreme distance from the ordinary witchcraft-fbrmula, is not 
readily explained. The common village-practitioner is not likely to have had 
much use for them, and even the Furohita in his ordinary offices in the 
rdjakarmdni might well have dispensed with them. Though they occur for 
the most part, barring the opening-hymns of several of the first books (2.1; 
4. I, 2; 5. I, 2; 7. I, 2)®, in the books S — 19, yet there is no reason to 
regard them as late on the whole. Their greater length excluded them from 
the first seven books, in accordance with the requirements of the redactors. 
But it is not . saying too much that some of them at least, say the Dlrgha- 
tamas brahmodya^ 9.9 and 10 (RV. i. 164), were adopted at a time when the 
adherents of the atkarvdmk and angirasab had coquetted for some time with 
the notion that their true place in the Vedic economy was the brahma as a 
whole, in distinction from the individual Vedic types of the trayi within which 
there was for them no place. In other words, that consciousness which later 
led to the name Brahma-Veda for the Atharvan is likely to have been to a 
certain extent a stimulus productive of just such compositions as would tend 
to strengthen this consciousness still further 3 . But it would be a mistake to 
suppose that theosophic speculation is foreign to the Atharvan, and inorganic; 
or, that all hymns of this sort are loosely attached to the main body of its 
compositions. On the contrary, there is evidence that theosophic ideas and 
formulas had to some extent worked their way into the very tissue of its 
composition. The charm 4. 19 with the afdmdrga-^\mt has for its sixth 
stanza: ‘Non-being {asaf) arose from the earth; that goes to heaven, (as) a 
great expansion. Thence, verily, that, spreading vapours, shall turn against 
the performer (of spells) P The hymn 9. 2 presents in an ordinary witchcraft 
charm a personalized god Kama as a destroyer of enemies, not very different 



III. Contents of the Atharva-Veda in the SaunakTya-School. 87 

from Agni; yet this Kama is not to be separated entirely from that kdma which 
is the ^ first seed (product) of the mind’ that came from ‘the one’, after it 
had sprung into existence through creative fervor (tapas): RV. 10. 129.4 (cp. 
AV. 19. 52)-^. Even more intricate is the blend of theosophic conceptions 
and material purposes in the hymns to Rohita (book 13): in the third hymn 
of this book the sun-principle is exalted in the best theosophic diction, often 
in the very formulas characteristic of this style, but the refrain exhibits the 
hymn in the service of the doctrine of the inviolability {ajy^aid) of the 
Brahmans: Rohita is here the wrathful god who punishes the persecutors of 
Brahmans (yo hraJmd 7 iani jindii)-, they are the theme and object of his dis- 
pleasure and wrath {dgas^ dva&ajia) 5 . Or, the first part of the first hymn 
(13. I. I — 35) correlates consciously with obvious puns the terrestrial Rohita, 
i. e., the king, with the divine Rohita; the king and his queen {fnahist) are 
exalted allegorically to the position of Rohita and his female RohinT: the 
fusion of the two is so thorough-going that it is at times difficult to decide 
which, the king or the god, is in the mind of the versifex^. The attentive 
reader of the Atharvan will frequently encounter this ti;^.nsition from philosophy 
to sophistry: philosophical ideas gone to seed, half decomposed, mixed and 
coagulated, bandied about and transferred in the relentless desire to produce 
some magic effect, or to exalt some divinity or ritualistic object far beyond 
its proper sphere (e. g. 7. 20. 6; 18. 4. 5; 19. 32. 9). The most notable 
medium for the culture of these false and excessive philosophemata are, as 
has been hinted above (S 56), the numerous daksind or sava-hymm. Every 
animal offered as dakshid is both itself and a cosmic power of the first rank : 
the gift of a goat, aja (4. 14; 9. 5) introduces Aja EkapM with his mystic 
punning attributes; in 9. 4 a bull {rsahhd) is exalted beyond bounds, ‘he 
carries all forms in his body'’, ‘he was at the beginning of things the counterpart 
of the waters’ (sts, i, 2); but after all it is naught but an ordinary sacrificial 
bull. Similarly the devoted vaid^ 10. 10, provokes metaphysicaT disquisitions 
so -fleeting, disjointed, and unsteady, that it is a relief to reassure one’s self 
with the aid of sti that, it is after all a cow with hoofs and a tail. Here and 
there, as e. g., in hymn 4. ii, to the steer {anadvdn)^ doubt remains as to 
whether we are facing a theosophical hymn, or a sava (Kaus. 66. 12). 
Similarly, but even more boldly naive, because unsupported by any kind of 
prior naturalistic conceptions, the hrahmaudana^ the porridge cooked for the 
Brahmans, is made the vehicle of theosophy (4. 34 and 35; cp. ii. 3. 21); 
the hrahmaudam is pertly identified with the ‘Ding an sich’, or the supreme 
creative and sustaining principle (4.35.3,5). Within this sphere of conceptions 
arose the famous hymn 11.7, to the ucchista^ the leavings of the brakmatidana'^ ^ 
with its momentary symbolic transfer of the highest divine or pantheistic 
attributes to an intrinsically most trivial ritualistic circumstance. It is well to 
remember that another high sphere of thought, the ethical, has similarly been 
pressed into the service of ordinary concerns: the noble hymn to Varuria, 
4. 16, apparently quite original in the AV., is in, reality a witchcraft charm, 
betraying its purpose in the gross curse at the end — in cauda venmium. 

In general this class of hymns in the AV. is not devoid of a certain 
kind of originality and independence which isolates them to a considerable 
extent from the theosophic mantras of the RV. and the other Sainhitas, as 
well' as from the speculations of the Upanisads. It is not saying too much 
that the Atharvan hymns are characterized by an even greater degree of 
gaxishness, unsteadiness, and gaucherie; of mock-profundity, and impotent 
reaching out after the inexpressible, than the corresponding hymns of the 
RV. To this is to be added a growing mechanicalness in the handling of 



88 IL Literature and History, i b. Atiiarva-Veda and GopXtha-Brahmana. 


these ideas: the important theosopliic attributes are taken out of pigeon- 
holes, as it were, and applied to the particular subject in hand, not without 
syncretism and awkward muddling. Occasionally the whole trick is to sub- 
stitute one name for another: one and the same pada and stanza is predicated 
in effect to different subjects of speculation. Cp. e. g. the Rohita-stanzas, AV. 
13. I. 45 — 55 with the Purusa-hymn, RV. 10. 90 ~ AV. 19. 6; or the even 
more literal equation, AV. 4. ii. i — 10. 7. 35. And these subjects have in- 
creased in 'number and variety. The AV. shares with the RV. the hrahtnodya- 
stanzas of Dirghatamas, 9. 9, 10 (RV. i. 164), which present in the form of 
theological charades the doctrine of the essential oneness of the universe, of 
its laws, and also of ^the nature of the sacrifice; the division of the stanzas 
into two hymns corresponds in general with the division of the subject matter: 
the second part (AV. 9. 10 = RV. i. 164. 23 if.) deals more directly with the 
relation of the sacrifice and its attributes (metres, priests, holy speech) to the 
universal order, whereas the first part deals with the manifestations of the 
universal one in the universe. The J^urusa-hymn, RV. 10. 90, reappears here, 
AV, 19. 6 (as also in other texts), with some variations that ease the sense, 
and point to later handling A Two independent Athar van-hymns (10.2; 11.8) 
owe their origin at least in part to suggestions derived from the purusa -sukia : 
10. 2 is a mystic meditation, in the form of question {kci)^ of the origin, form, 
parts of the body, and biological character of the purusa^ the primeval 
cosmic man, who is, of course, described in the terms of the natural man. 
The questions introducing the stem ka allude to Prajapati-Brahman, and 
assimilate the hymn furthermore to the famous hiranyagarbha-sukta^ RV. 10. 
1 21, of which the AV. also presents a poor version, 4. 2. Another even more 
mystic derivation of purusa in his double cosmic and human aspect is con- 
tained in I I. 8; the purusa is derived from a cosmic marriage in the manner 
of the wedding-hymn {suryd^sUkta^ AV. 14 = RV. 10.85), riie parties 

concerned are psychological and religious forces: Manyu (^WilP) leads Akuti 
(‘Intellect’) from the house of Samkalpa (^Determination’); Tapas and Karman 
are the woers, Brahman the woer-in- chief. It is a kind of a soul-marriage: Manyu 
is identified further on with ten psycho-physical forces, prd/ia, apdna^ mksu/j^ 
srotraniy etc., and it is they that produce the purusa. Thus in reality Brahman 
and the psychic and religious forces connected with him express themselves 
in the soul-life of the purusa. On the other hand the Vedic gods, Indra, 
Agni, and even Brhaspati, occupy a very subordinate position, being regarded 
(st. 10) as ‘children’, each born out of himself, Indra from India, Agni from 
Agni, etc., Devas from Devas; to them the world is made over. The hymn 
seems to postulate distinctly enough the identity of soul (a/;v2i2«) mih brahma^ 
clearly expressed in the Upanl5ads, though the word atman does not occur 
in it 9 . The conception of the diman appears also in the hymn to Prana 
(ii. 4), life or breath personified as the supreme spirit; and the two pec- 
uliarly abstract and involved hymns to Skambha ‘Support’ (10. 7 and 8), 
which seem to. reach out after an even more subtle formulation of the last 
cause of things than that contained in Purusa or Brahma, wind up after all 
in sts. 10. 8. 43, 44 with a statement that presents the knowledge of Brahma 
and Atman as the highest goaP'^. Related with this hymn is the .brad modja 
5. I. The brahma, prayer (Veda),_ as supreme principle, is modulated in the 
greatest variety of keys: in 4. i it appears in its own neuter character as 
‘the first born brahma begotten of yore’, but passes 'over quickly (st. 2) into 
the related conception of Vac ‘speech’, i. e. holy speech embodied ' in the 
Veda, and in this form it is represented especially by the hymn to Vaci, 4. 30 
(RV. 10. 125), and in the hrahmodya~%X’mz2& 7. i. The enigmatic 



in. Contents of the Atharva-Veda in the SaunakIya-School. 89 


hymn 8. 9, addressed to Viraj, has also in mind Vac Viraj (9. 2. 5); in startl- 
ing language st. 7 asserts the paradox, ‘they call Viraj (female) the father 
of Brahma’. She in turn acts as the creative principle, her two calves (sun 
and moon) came forth from the waters (st. i). The following piece, 8. 10, 
recites in Brahmana-prose the curious migrations and metamorphoses of Viraj, 
posited as the first principle {vird 4 va idam agra dsJt) ; the pervasive quality 
of Viraj (holy speech) culminates in the truly Atharvanic anti-climax at the 
end of the hymn, 30 — 33, which betrays the bathos and specious mysticism 
of both hymns (9 and 10): they are an intellectual exercise preparatory to 
counter-witchcraft; if one merely says, ‘in my mind do I repel sorcery', he 
does (by that mere statement) repel it. The conception of prayer or holy 
knowledge as the spiritual light that causes and reveals the world gradually 
roots itself within more concrete individual facts and entities of the universe. 
Thus st. 7 of the above-mentioned hymn 4. i, from its Atharvanic point of 
view, passes the bra/ima on to its typical priest, the Atharvan (Brhaspati), 
who henceforth takes the place, or is intimately associated with Brahma, 
Prajapati, and the creative principle: AV. 7. This is in reality the 
Atharvanic version of the change of hrdhma to hrafiniL But especially the 
dominant power of the visible world, the sun, is blended so inextricably with 
the conception of the brahma^ beginning with the famous gayatrTstanza, RV. 
3. 62. 10*^, as to justify the statement that there is scarcely any theosophic 
hymn which does not more or less distinctly, primarily or secondarily, have 
in mind the great heavenly body. 

Thus the hymn to Vena ‘the lovely’, 2. i, is founded upon the epithet 
vena^ attributed to the sun, RV. i. 83. 5, and more particularly to the Gan- 
dharva, the child of the sun (the rainbow?), RV. 10. 123 and 139. This 
Vena appears as the first cause of things in AV. 2. i, but no longer simply 
as the sun, or the Gandharva, but as a seer of the divine revelation, i. e. as 
a personification of the brahma^ the spiritual light that reveals the world * 3 . 
Less subtly, but defaced by all sorts of secondary, often grossly practical 
lucubrations, the red (‘ascending’) sun, Rohita, figures as creator and preserver 
of the world in the Rohita-book, AV. 13 (TB. 2. 5, 2. i — 8)’+. Rohita, or 
any other solar or creative principle, measures and pervades time (AV. 13, 
2.39);^ cp. the familiar chain brahma^prajapatisamvatsara in the Brahmarias 
(e. g. SB. I. 5. I. 16; II. I. 6. 13). Hence in 19. 53 and 54 Kala ‘Time’, 
‘Father Time’ (53. 8), the first of the gods, creates heaven and earth and all 
they contain; even the otherwise primordial principles, tapas^ jyesjkam (the 
highest), brahma are fixed in time, A little to one side of this chain of 
developments^ yet clearly within the sphere of conceptions that correlate the 
brahma with the sun, is 11.5; here a Brahman disciple ibrahmacdrin) in the 
full glory of his holy functions and monastic habits is treated as an incarnation 
of the brahma: from him the brahma springs, and in his holy life [brdhmanam) 
the brahma is glorified. Yet at the , same time it is the shining brahma, 
{brahma bhrdjat^ st. 24); or, the brahmacdrin ‘that moves inciting both hemi- 
spheres of the world’ (st. i), who ‘within the day passes from the eastern to 
the northern sea’ (st. 6); cp. also sts. ii, 23, 26, and GB. i. 2. i. Similarly 
RV. 10. 136 glorifies the sun as a solitary ascetic Underneath and along 
with the conception of the brahma there is always the more concrete and 
monotheistic personification of the personal creator, Prajapati ‘the lord of 
creatures’. This more direct and popular conception also allies itself familiarly 
yirith the solar divinities as the lusty creative principle of the world: hence 
the familiar identification in the Brahmanas of Prajapati with Savitar and 
Tva§|ar. As a whole this propagative force is symbolized still more tangibly 



90 II. Literature and History, x b. Atharva-Yeda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


as a bull, steer, or cow; the bestowal of such animals as daksind isavd) 
especially elicits this animal-symbolism; to such an extent is this trae^ that 
the victim is animal and pantheistic-monotheistic divinity at the same time. 
Thus the bull, rsabha, in 9. 4 is assimilated in turn to the various celestial 
bulls, Bohita, India, Tvastar etc.; or 9.7, a pantheistic meditation in Brahmana- 
prose, compares each limb or part of the bull senselessly with a divinity or 
cosmic force. The sava of a steer (anadvdn^ 4. ii) furnishes occasion with 
equal facility to make the steer the exponent of the same sublime conditions 
as the very much more abstract Skambha; cp. 4. ii. 1 with 10. 7. 35 (see 
above). The gift of a goat, a/e (4. 14; 9. 5), finds in the divine Aja Ekapad 
a convenient peg to fasten theosophic disquisitions upon. And finally when 
occasion arises for the bestowal of the female vaM (p. 87) it requires but 
little more sophistry and oddity to make her the wife of Parjanya, the guardian 
of heaven and earth (12.4,4,6). We have seen above that the purely 
ritualistic hrahmaudana and especially its leavings [ucchisjd) also appear in 
the light of the universal pantheistic force: we may suspect this to be an 
extension of the treatment, of the animal- To the same sphere of con- 
ceptions, but more liturgic in tone, is 9. 6, in praise of the mystic merits of 
hospitality {arghya)\ the details of its acts are compared with a sacrifice in 
which the host {atithipaii) as sacrifice! (yajamdna) virtually accomplishes a 
sacrifice, providing he understands the mystic purport of his own acts. 

In striking contrast with the vigorous though peculiar development of 
theosophic speculations in the AV. is its barrenness on the side of purely mytho- 
logical fancy. The RV, deals with the gods of nature as the theme of its 
poetry: the Atharvan cultivates the more homely genii like Aryaman, Anumati, 
etc., or substitutes demonology. The character of the leading divinities of 
the BY., Agni, India, Surya, is scarcely developed at all, barring the un- 
doubtedly popular advance of that fusion of Agni with Budra in the direction 
which finally produces the god Siva^®. The hymns and stanzas addressed to 
the mythological gods are in the main borrowed from outside sources; thus 
when we encounter^ the long Indra-hymn, 5. 2, it is in reality BY. 10. 120 
(employed as a battle-charm, Kaus. 15. i), or the still longer hymn to Agni, 
8. 3 (BY. 10. 87), is addressed to Agni in the character of Baksas-killer. Like 
a fresh breath of wind upon the sultry atmosphere of both demonology and 
theosophy comes the singular and exceptional hymn 12. i, addressed to 
Goddess Earth. This is one of the most attractive compositions of the AY., 
rising at times to poetic conception of no mean merit, and comparatively free 
from the stock-artificialities of the Yedic poets. The relation of the real 
visible earth to man, animals, and plants preponderates wholesomely over the 
remoter mythological and mystic conceptions ^ 7 , Somewhat in the same vein, 
though decidedly inferior, is 9. the so-cdiled madJiusuMa, a hymn to the 
‘honey-lash* of the Asvins {madhukaid). The mythic or realistic back- ground 
of the honey-lash may possibly be ‘the honey (the heavenly water) that lashes*, 
or the lightning which whips the clouds and produces rain. The hymn sym- 
bolizes prosperity in its widest aspect (mrcasya)^^. The cosmic hymn i- 32, 
dealing in praise of the physical atmosphere {antariksa)^ also deserves mention 
in this connection. 

I Cp. the interesting repertory of the theosophic hymns of the AV. in the 
CuHka Up. iiflf. ; and see, Muller, HASL. p, 556 fif.; Muir, OST., V. 350 ff.; 
Ludwig, Der Rig-Veda, III. 393 ff.; Schermakt, Philosophische Hymnen, p- 44 — 88’; 
V. ScHROEDER, Indian’s Litteratnr, p. 79 ff.; Hardy, Vedisch-Brahmanische Periode, 
p. 207 ff.; Deussen, Allgemeine Geschichte der Philosophie, vol. I, part i, p. 209 ff.; 
Bloomfield, SBE. XLII, p. 199 — 232, and the notes to these hymns. See also the 
translations of nearly all these hymns in Henry, Les Livres VIII et IX de PAV. ; 



III. Contents of the Atharva-Veda in the SaunakIya-Schoot.. 9 1 


Les Livres IX, X, et XI de FAV. ; and Les Hymnes Rohitas (livre XTII). — 2 See 
on this point S 37* — ^ above S 33* — SBE. XIJI. 591. — 5 See above, 
% 56; cp. Deussen, p. 216. — 6 Bloomfield, Contributions. Fourth Series, AJPh. 
XII. 430 ff. — 7 Cp. TB. I. I. 9. 1; MS. 2. I. 12, — 8 cp. Deussen, p. 150. — 
9 The hymn is unquestionably very late and paradoxical, but it is not therefore 
necessary to assume with Deussen (p. 270) that its author deals disrespectfully with 
earlier traditions, except in the sense in which all theosophic speculations attach 
inferior importance to all divinities and religious acts, except the search after and 
knowledge of the fundamental cause, the one being. Cp. Deussen, p. 310 ff. 

— Cp- GB. I. I. Mundaka Up. I. i. 2; Nyasa Up. I. ‘The light of 

Savitar which impels our holy thought’. Cp. Rajendralala. Mitra in the intro- 
duction to the GB., p. 24. — 13 See Weber, IS. XIII. 129; Ludwig, Lc. III. 393; 
ScHERMAN, p. 82; Deussen, p. 252 ff. Hillebrandt, Soma, p. 322 ff., regards veym 
as the moon. — H Muir, OST.V. 395; Henry, Les Hymnes Rohitas; Bloomfield, 
AJPh. XII. 429 ff.; Deussen, p. 212 ff. — *5 SBE. XLII 214, 626 ff.; Henry, Les 
Livres X, XI, et XII, p. 114, 150 ff.; Deussen, p. 277. The z/nz^^j-sections, book 15, 
exalt an outcast, or vagabond, who has however entered into the Brahmanical life, 
as’^the supreme being (Brahma); see $ 61. — 16 See especially AV. 4. 28 and 11.2; 
cp. SBE. XLII. 406, 618. — *7 Ludwig, 1. c. III. 544 ff.; SBE. XLII. 199, 639 ; Henry, 
1. c. 179, 215 ff. — iS Henry, Les Livres VIII et IX, p. 81, iisff.; SBE. XLII, 
p. 229, 587 ff. 

S.60. Class ii). Ritualistic and general hymns. — The question 
arises whether the AV. contains hymns which owe their presence in the 
collection from the start to the existence of Atharvanic Srauta-rites. Since 
the Srauta-manual of the AV., the Vaitana-sutra, is late^^ the appearance in 
it of many hymns of the Saunaklya-sakha is non-significant and otiose. The 
Vait rubricates practically the entire 20*^ book of the AV., but this is itself 
a late Srauta-supplement to the collection, proving nothing for its original 
scope and intention®. In addition the Vait- employs many scattered hymns 
and stanza’s, especially of the sixth and seventh books, in a manner more or 
less befitting its own subject matter, and frequently coincident with the em- 
ployment of the same kind of stanzas in other Srauta-works. But, as it 
happens, the same stanzas are as a rule worked up in the Kausika as well; 
they may therefore owe their presence in the AV. originally to circumstances 
and practices such as the Kausika has in mind; the Vait. may have later 
taken them up anew in a sense suitable to its own sphere of activity. The 
inner content of a hymn br stanza is under these circumstances not calculated 
to decide as to the original intention of the diaskeuasis: a secondary employ- 
ment of a hymn in Kaus. may be chronologically anterior to the more pri- 
mary in Vait, providing we trust, as we well may, the author of the Vait 
with a sufficient knowledge of the habits of the Srauta;practices to recognize 
the obvious and correct applicability of such hymns to Srauta-practices. Thus 
the hymn 6.1, a seemingly inferior version of AS. 8.1. 18, is an evening-song 
to Savitar, rubricated three times, Kaus. 23. 2; 50. 13; 59. 25: its employment 
in all three places is secondary and very general. Notwithstanding this, and 
granting its intrinsic Srauta-character in more or less close correspondence 
with its employment at Vait 17. 2, there is no^ proof that it was originally 
incorporated into the AV. in its capacity as a Srauta-hymn: some such use 
as is manifested in one -or the other of its occurrences in Kausika may have 
been the original one with the Atharvavedins, or its employment both in Kaus. 
and Vait may be different from and secondary tc the original intention. 

Recognizing these cautionary circumstances we may nevertheless say 
outright that the AV. is acquainted with pretty much the entire sphere of Srauta- 
rites 3 , and, what is more important, that some of its hymns cannot be imagined 
have been composed or absorbed from other Vedic sources ^without direct 
reference to practices which are ordinarily treated in the Srauta-manuals. 
Thus the rudiments at least of the agnispma^ possibly in some simpler form 



92 


II, Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


than that exhibited by the of the tr(p>% are represented by 6. 47 

and 48. The first of these is not mentioned in Kaus. at all; but appears 
altogether suitably in connection with the three savanas^ Vait 21. 7. These 
stanzas, probably not original with the AV., can hardly have been absorbed 
in the redaction except for the reason that they were at that time in vogue 
at the three savanas^ as practiced by adherents of the AV. The second of 
these hymns (6. 48) consists ofYajus-formulas differing more or less from the 
corresponding formulas of the Srauta-texts^; it is quoted in Kaus. 5 ^* 4; 59 * 
26; 27 under circumstances that betray unmistakably its secondary employment. 
Here also by the very force of their contents it seems unlikely that they 
owe their Atharvanic composition to anything else than the savanas. The 
Vait employs them accordingly, 17. 10; 21. 7, and that too in the order of 
the three sts. demanded by their context and the parallel^ formulas : in this 
instance the ritualistic tradition surpasses that of the Sarnhita, either reaching 
behind it, or correcting it by superior information Again, rhe loosely attached 
St. 7. 76. 6 (RV. 6. 47. 6), addressed to Indra at the mdd/iyamdina-savana^ is 
not mentioned in Kaus., whereas it appears in a proper place, Vait. 16. 14. 
Add to this the familiarity with the savanas betrayed by incidental allusions, 
such as in 9. i. ii — 13 (cp. also 7. 72. 3), or the elaborate invitations to 
Indra to partake of soma, 2. 5; 6 (cp. also 7. 58 and 117), and it js not 
too much to say that the Atharvans knew and practised soma-rites prior to 
the redaction of the Sarphita, Wliether this was carried on in the spirit and 
with the equipment of the Vedic schools of the trayt^ or in some more 
elementary form that did, above all, not require a variety of priests, can 
hardly be discerned^ The same kind of enquiry is suggested by the two 
hymns, 5. 12 (RV. 10. no, etal,), and 5.27 (VS. 27. ii if.; MS. 2. i2.*’6; 
TS. 4. 1. 8). The Vait, 10. ii ff., exhibits them^ in accordance with the original 
intention of ^rf-hymns at pasuhandha^ a Srauta-performance ; Kaus. 45.8 
at the sacrifice of the vasd as daksinp, (cp. AV. 10. 10; 12. 4), a kind of 
practice which the AV. at any rate has elaborated independently of Srauta- 
types as a sacrifice with one priest and one fire. It is impossible to judge 
from this whether the pasuhandha represents the original Atharvanic intention 
of these hymns, or whether the Vait. has merely revamped them according 
to other Srauta-models, 'Similar questions may be asked in connection with 
a considerable list of ritualistic hymns: the hymn 2. 6 (VS. 27. rff ; MS. 2. 
12. 5; TS. 4. I. 7) is employed Vait. 28. 4, 10 in accordance with its original 
intention, aV;the agnicayana^ whereas Kaus. 59. 15; 102. 4 presents it under 
obviously secondary aspects (cp, also 7. 62; 63; and 78); the hymn 7. 73 is 
a prayer to the Asvins while offering hot milk (cp. gMrma'-h.yxsm from 
the AVP. in Vait. 14. i); the hymn 7.97 consists of YajuS' stanzas and formulas 
(VS. 8. IS ff. ; MS. I. 3. 38; TS. i. 4, 44), addressed to Agni, Indra, and other 
gods. Of marked ritualistic character are further 7.27, a stanza to Ida (Vait 
3. 15; cp. SB. I. 8. I. 7if.); 7. 28, addressed to certain sacrificial instruments 
(Vait 4, 12; 13. 2; cp. TS.3.2.4. i); 7.30, a st pronounced while annointing; 
7.98, while annointing the barkis) 7.99 while preparing the vedi (cp. TB. 3. 7. 

i); 7 - 33 while sprinkling (TA. 2. 18. i); 7. 71, paryagnikarana (RV. 10. 87. 
22, etal); 7.74.4, to Agni, lord of vows; 6.10, prayer to the cosmic triad 
7.89, sts. to the waters and Yajus-formulas to the fagots (repeated in almost all 
Vedic collections)®. Cp. also such hymns as 7.25; 26; 29, and many others, 
especially in books 6 and 7, that are addressed to members of the pantheon, 
regarding which it is impossible to say whether their originally ritudistic 
function, or some secondary use {pausHka) secured them a place in the 
Saiphita. The same doubt is suggested by the numerous hymns to the waters, 



III. Contents of the Atharva-Veda in the SaunakTya-School. 93 


I. 4 — 6; 33; 6. 23; 7. 89; 16. i; 19. 2; 69; and especially the long composite 
rigmarole, 10. 5. Cp. the apdm suktdnii Kausika, Index B, p. 383; the salildni, 
ib. 385; and the gana^ Kaul 41. 14. 

A , special ritualistic flavor attaches to a considerable number of hymns 
of varying import all of which state distinctly that they are accompanied by 
an oblation, or havis. This /lavis is preceded by an adjective or noun which 
expresses tersely the purpose of the hymn. Thus i. 15; 2. 26; and 19. i 
are accompanied by sdmsrdvya havis ^that causes the flowing together of 
wealth^; 6.39 yaso havis Hhat confers glory’; 6.40 by saptarsJn dm havis 
•oblation to the Seven Rishis (that trees from danger)’; 6. 64 by samdna 
havis ‘that makes harmonious’; 6.65 (and 66) by ‘that makes 

(the enemy) handless’; 6.75 by nairbddhya havis ‘that suppresses (the enemy); 
6. 78 by bhuta. havis ‘that produces power’; 6. 80 by sum dhyasya mahas 
havis ‘that contains the majesty of the heavenly dog’; 6. 87 (and 88j; 7.94 
by dhruva havis ‘that makes stable’; cp. also the less clearly defined havis 
in I. 31 ; 6. 41; 7. 70; 77; the guhya ghrta in 7. 29, and the pratrdsa djya in 
5. 21. 2. Once, in i. 29. i, the AV. substitutes characteristically abhlvarta 
mani for abhlvarta havis ^ RV. 10^ 174. i. The RV. mentions such special 
havis in hymns of Atharvanic character: rathavdhana havis m dhruva 

havis in 10. 173. 6 (AV. 7. 94). Ludwig, who first invited attention to this 
feature and its peculiar development in the AV. 9 , fitly describes it as a ‘teil- 
cserimonie for a special purpose: it may be defined further by describing it 
as the h)nnnal correspondent of the kdmyd istayali of the Srauta-literature. 
In the course of other practices a special libation for a purpose, aside per- 
haps from the main action, might be naturally introduced. Since this action 
bore upon matters of ordinary life it insinuated itself more particularly into 
the prayers and performances of the Atharvans, assuming there a more 
independent and technical form. 

1 Garbe, Vaitana SQtra, Preface, p. vii; Bloomfield, JAOS. XT. 3750*.; Hille- 
BRANDT, Ritual-Litteratur, p. 35. — 2 See below, $ 62. — 3 The sauirdviam is 
mentioned in 3. 3. 2; an almost exhaustive catalogue of sacrifices and liturgical 
terms is presented in n. 5. 5 AT. — 4 JAOS. XV. 3, 4. — 5 Ibid. p. 5 > note- — ^ The 
tiisavana-vraia mentioned in the late Atharvanic manual, Ath. Paddh. to Kau^. 
57. 32,* is not likely to bear directly upon this sacrifice ; cp. BRW. s. v., and JIlLLE- 
BRANDT, Ritual-Litteratur, p. 58, 7 The GB. regularly substitutes an Atharvanic 

tetrad or pentad in such cases: i- 1. 17 — 20, 29; 2. 16, 24; 3. 24, etc-; AV. 2. 
19—23; Kaus. 1 19. 2, 3. ~ 8 RV. I. 23. 22—24, et al. — 9 Der Rig-Veda, HI. 
371 ff.; cp. SEE. XLII, in the notes on these hymns, especially p. 479, 498, 
and 500- 

s 61. Class 12). The books dealing with individual themes 
(books 13— 18). — The six books 13 — 18 are devoted to special themes. 
Book 13* contains four long hymns addressed to a form of the sun-god 
called Rohita ‘The Red’, with constant puns on the root ruh, as though, 
‘he that -has been led up (to the sky;’; his female RohinI (SuryT, Usas)® 
figures also. Rohita is not merely the heavenly body or its divinity, but he is 
swelled out by means of theosophic notions, so as to appear as the creator 
and preserver of the universe, a form of Prajapati. A considerable part of 
the book, however, is either not connected with the main theme at all, or 
exhibits the main theme in secondary application L The first 35 sts. of the 
first hymn, apj)arently the main stock of the entire book, correlate Rohita 
with an earthly king whose kingdom is given him, and whose kingdom is 
preserved by Rohita. Sts. 36 — 44 are a mystic presentation of the wonders 
connected with the appearance and disappearance of the sun; sts. 45— 55 
present Rohita (sun, fire) as a Rishi who kindles with his prayers the two 



94 n. Literature and History, i b. Atharva-V ; ;)A and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


sacrificial fires, winter and summer, upon which the life of nature is founded. 
The remaining sts. of this hymn are even more extraneous. The second 
hymn is addressed to the sun in his more general aspects; only sts. 25^26 
and 39 — 41 deal directly with Rohita. The third hymn presents Rohita as 
the avenger of the oppressors of Brahmans; the fourth hym^, partly prose, 
engages in praise of the god in hackneyed terms. 

Book 14 contains the wedding-stanzas of the Atharvans'^. They coincide 
largely, though by no means entirely, with the suryd-sukta, RV.10.85. Other 
stanzas of the RV., notably 10. 40.1 off., and scatteringly still others, reappear; 
yet a considerable number are not found in the RV. In the Grhya-sltras 
most of these stanzas recur with many variants. The chronology and inter- 
relation of the wedding-stanzas in all these, texts is a subject for special 
investigation: none of the existing collections of these stanzas present them 
in anything like their primary aspect. 

Book 15 in Brahma^a-prose is devoted to the mystic exaltation of the 
vrdtya^* In the list of theosophic subjects which the CulikaUp. ii ascribes 
to the AV. the vrdtya figures between the Brahmac^in (AV. ii. 5) and 
Skambha (AV. 10.7,8}^. There can be no doubt that the theme is in reality 
Brahma, but section 5 which introduces the muriis of Rudra shows it to be 
under Sivaitic influence. The vra^ya (vrdfSm) seems to be a kind of a 
Brahmacarin, or at any rate one who has entered the Brahmanical community 
after having been converted from an Aryan, but non-Brahmanicsd tribe. 
This is the theme of the so-called vrdtyastomdfi^ described especially in the 
Srauta-books of the SV. (PB. 17. i; LS. 8. 6 ) 7 ; these rites make it possible 
for an unholy, half-savage, community {ita hi brahmacaryarfi car anti na krsini 
na vamjydm, PB. 17. i. 2) to become Brahmans. The connection between 
the vrdtya-hook and the vrdtyasioma is not to be questioned: in 15.2 the 
statement that ‘faith has become his paramour, holy words (mantra) his 
Magadha (outcaste associate)^ clearly refers to the conversion of the vrdtya; 
the occurrence of such words zs umJsa, pratoda^ and vipatha in AV. 15. 2, 
as well as in PB. 17.1. 14, clinches the connection still further*. The vrdtya^ 
having beoorae holy through his acquired hrahmacaryam is emphatically the 
representative of brahma; like the Brahmacarin (ii. 5) he is apotheosized. 
The mention of a large number of Samans in the book seems to point 
to some sort of a connection with the schools of the Sama-Veda. The 
contents are too abstruse and too absurd for analysis. The book is wanting 
in AVP. 

The sixteenth book contains two distinct parts not related in any way. 
AV. 19. 23. 26 seems to refer to them in the expression prdjdpatydbhyd^i 
svdhd. The first four pieces (first anuvaka) consist of prose-formulas, running 
into metre occasionally (4. 2); they are designated, Ath. Paxil 10, as abkisc' 
kamantrdh^ They clearly consist of ritualistic formulas dealing to some extent 
with the praise of the waters 9 . Their purpose however is not quite clear, 
even in the light of Kanaka’s employment of them. Section 2 recurs ApS, 
6. 20. 2 with interesting variations. The rest of the book, 5 — 9 (second 
anuvaka) is an elaborate conjuration against nightmare which is driven out 
from one’s self and imposed upon enemies. Why these two sections have 
been gathered up in a separate book does not appear. 

Nor is it possible to point out the reason why the single hjnnn, book 17, 
should have reached the distinction of a separate book for itself. The hymn, 
known as the visdsahi (AV. 19. 23. 27), is one of the most prominent of 
the dyusydni (class 2) and figures especially in the rites connected with the 
life of the young Arya*^^. Kesava to ELaui ^a. raff, aud Atk Faddk to 



IIL Contents of the Atharva-Veba in the SaunakIya-School. 


95 


Kaxii S7« 32 mention a visasahi-vrata^'^ from the same sphere of practices; 
doubtless this hymn figured prominently in it 

Book 18 in four hymns (each an anuvaka) contains the funeral-stanzas, 
being pretty certainly a later version of the corresponding materials in BV. X. 
This is evident especially from the incorporation into the AV. of E.V. X. 
10 — 12; sts. I — 39 of AV. 18. I contain these three hymns in the same 
order as the RV., omitting only six stanzas. The reappearance ofRV. 10. 10 
in the AV. is natural, because the hymn contains the famous dialogue between 
Yama and YamI, whereas RV. 10. ii and 12 which have no direct relation 
to Yama or the funeral-practices, are incorporated in the AV. in deference 
to the redaction of the RV. All 39 sts. are ignored by Kausika. The 
remaining sts. of hymn i and the whole of hymn 2 repeat in totally changed 
order sts, from RV. 10. 14 — 17, introducing occasionally other RV. sts., or 
such as do not appear in RV. at all. Of the 73 sts. of the third hymn only 
32 are found in RV.; the rest are peculiar to the AV. and theYajus (TA. 6). 
Still more original is hymn 4: only 12 of its 89 sts. are recruited from various 
books of the RV., and only 7 others coincide with the funeral stanzas of 
TA. 6^^. The Atharvan version of this subject is to some extent original, 
and is not in complete accord with the practices of Kausika which in turn 
present many individual traits elsewhere unknown. A single original funeral 
stanza, 7. 21, is stranded outside of the main collection, being seemingly 
employed, Kaus. 86. 16, in a connection which does not bear upon its con- 
tents. Very valuable side-lights upon the funeral-practices are afforded by 
numerous Atharvan conjurations which allude to details freer and more con- 
vincing than many that are codified either in the funeral-stanzas or in the Sutras; 
thus the practices of mourning-women which are alluded to in many passages * 5. 
For other suggestions of this kind see SBE.XLII, Index, under ‘funeral practices^ 
Alberuni, India (Sachaxj's translation), vol. I, p. 129, remarks that the AV. 
contains injunctions regarding the dead, s^nd what is to be done with them. 

* Muir, OST. V. 395 ; Henry, Les Hymnes Rohitas ; Bloomfield, AJPh. XII. 
429 ff.; Regnaud, Le Rig-Veda et les origines de la mythologie indo-europdenne, 
p. 3Uff.; Deussen, Allgemeine Geschichte der Philosophic, vol. I, part i, p-209ff. 
— a JAOS. XV. 186; AJPh. XIL 430- -• 3 Cp. above, $ 59* — 4 Translated by 
Weber, IS. V. 195 ff. — 5 A tentative translation by Aufrecht, IS. I. 130 ff. — 
6 Cp. also Pra^na Up. 2, ii. — 7 Cp. AS. 9. 8. 25; KS. 12. i. 2; 22. 4. 1,27; 
Yajhav. I. 34. — ^ Aufrecht, IS. I. 138; Weber, IS. I. 33, 52, 445 note; WL2. 
73, 85 ff., 122—4, J63, 196; HiLLEBRANDT,Ritual-Litteratur, p. I40, i68, 179. The term 
vratja is probably derived from compounds like anyavrata; apavraia, etc. ‘having 
different customs’. — 9 See Kaui§. 9. 9; 2. iS, and the Index of Citations, p. 410. 
— See Kausika, Index of Citations, p. 410. — Cp. Hillebrandt, Ritual- 
Litteratur, p. 58. — ** Book 18 has been translated, explained, and analysed by 
Weber, SPAW., 1895, p. Sis ff; 1896, p. 253!!.; cp. also his remark, SPAW., 1891, 
p, 786. For the literature and criticism of the funeral-ceremonies see CaLand, 
Die Altindischein Todten- und Bestattungsgebrauche, in the Transactions of the 
Amsterdam Academy, 1896, especially the introduction and p. 163 ff.; PlllXEBRANDT, 
Ritual-Litteratur, p. 87 ff. — *3 BLOOMFIELD, Contributions. Second Series, AJPh. 

XL 

% 62. Class 13). The twentieth book.. — Of the 143 hymns of book 20 
only 13 are in any way peculiar to the AV., namely 2, 48, 49> ^^7 — 
ill addition the sts. 34. 12, 16, 17, and 107. 13 — 13. 2. 34^ Of these the 
so-called kuntapa-suktani^ 127 — 136, in their Atharvanic form and extent are 
original, and no pada-text of them appears to exist; they are wanting in AVP. 
The Other hymns and stanzas, just catalogued, are borrowed firom AVP.^^ 
The remaining hymns of the book, mostly addressed to Indra, are derived 
bodily, without a single variant, from the RV., largely the eighth mandala. 
Thus, e. g., RV. 10. 163 is repeated verbatim AV. 20, 96. 17 — 22, although 



96 11. Literature and History, ib. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahman\\. 

its Atharvan version with the usual variations has occurred previously, 2. 33. 
Compare similarly AV. 5. 2 with RV. 10. 120 = AV. 20. 107. 4—12. The 
book is known as the sastrakdn 4 a, being largely rubricated in Vait, beginning 
with 19. 6 (in the course of the agnistoma\ and extending through to the 
end of that text. It was compiled for use of the Brahman-priest, or more 
particularly his Atharvanic assistent, the Brahmai^acchamsin, at the sastras and 
stoiras. of the soma-sacrifices^, at a time when the Atharvans had adopted 
systematic and extensive Srauta-rites in imitation of the other Vedic schools; 
its ritualistic character may be observed especially in connection with the 
te/^/dZ-hymns which are preceded and followed by the RV. hymns in the 
order in which they are called for by the ritual as described in the Brahmanas 
and Sutras^. The AV. Pratisakhya does not take it into account (any more 
than book 19) 5 ; it would seem therefore that these books did not at that 
time form part of the Saunakiya-Samhita, although, of course, this may be 
due to conscious neglect, induced on the one hand by the exceeding corruption 
of the Atharvanic parts of these books; on the other by the knowledge that 
the Rig-Vedic parts of book 20 belong to another sakha, were therefore not 
prdtisdkhya. Of the Atharvanic materials hymn 2 consists of Yajus-formulas 
recited in connection with the rtu-grahas at the agnisfoma^N dXX, 19. 23®; the 
three Indra-stanzas 34. 12, 16, 17 are original; hymns 48 and 4$ are not even 
rubricated in Vait. All these are fromAVP. The single st. 107. 13 *= 13.2.34 
is a later modification of 13. 2. 35 (— RV. i. 115. i, et al). The kuntdpa- 
hymns call for a separate and more searching statement of their contents, 
purpose, and relation to the ritual, since their Atharvan version seems to be 
the fullest and most original in existence. 

* Whitney, Index Verborum, p. 2; Oldenberg, Die Hymnen des RV., 348 ff. 
— 2 Roth, AV. in Kaschmir, p. 23. — 3 Roth, Abhandlung, p. 21 ; AV. in Kaschmir, 
1. c.; WL.2 162, note; GarbE, Vaitana-Sutra, Preface, p. 8, and the notes on the 
translation of Vait. 25. ii; 26. lo; 27'. 28, 29; Weber, SPA W., 1891, p. 787, note; 
APAW., 1893, p. 5; Oldenberg, ibid, p. 346. — 4 See below, S 63, near the end. 
5 Whitney, JAOS. VII. 334, 581; cp. WL*, p. 168, note. — • ^ Similar formulas, 
K&. 9. 8. 9fr.; ApS. ii. 9. .8 (cp. SB. 4. 6. 6. 5). 

§ 63. Class 14). The kuntapa-hymns. — AV. 20. 127—136 are de- 
signated in the mss. as kuntdpasuktdm^, being introduced and concluded by 
the expressions, af/ia kuntdpasuktdni^ and, iti kuntdpasuktdni samdptdnu The 
exact scope of the designation kuntdpa is not certain. Saya^a at AB. 6.32.1; 
33, I defines as the kuntdpa-\iymvi the thirty stanzas, equal to the first two 
hymns of the kunfdpa-samMtdy as given in the AV. (20. 127 and 128), but 
the whole collection also figures in his view as a supplementary book {kkiia) 
with the name kunidpa"^. This seems also to be the view of the Vaifi 32. 19, 
which assigns the name to the first two hymns, and employs ^the designations 
aitaiapraidpa^ etc. for the following hymns (32. 20 ff.). In SS. 12. 13. 7 (cp. 
12. 6. 13) the term kuntdpa setms to be restricted to a part of the collection, 
as given in that Sutra (12. 14 — 16 = AV. 20. 127. 1—6, ii — 13; 128. 12, 
^ 3 ? 15; ^ 35 * X3, II, 12). But inasmuch as all parts of the collection, including 
those just mentioned, have specific names in addition to the generic kmidpa 
(see below), the latter word may after all have been used by Sankhayana 
(as also by Vait.) at the beginning of his presentation of the ii^^/i/^-materiais 
as a name for the whole to the neglect of the specific names {ndrdsamsya^, 
raibhyah, etc.) 3 , until he arrived (12. 17) at the pdriksitydh. This view is 
born out by KB. 30. 5. Similarly AS. 8, 3. 7 the \yor& kuntdpa is used by 
way of introduction to these materials, none of the subsidiary designations 
appearing until the bhuteckadaJk-^XsaxzzB (AV, 20. 135. ii ff.) are reached, sutra 
27. Again, GB, 2. 6. 12 begins with, atha kuntdpani samsaii, neglecting the 



III. Contents of the Atharva-Veda in the SaunakTya-School. 97 

subsidiary name nardsavisyah for the opening passage, idam jand upa sriita 
(AV. 20. 127. I — 3), but introducing the following subdivisions with their 
proper designations, atha raibhih safhsati, vyacasva etc. (AV. 20. 127.4 — 6). 
On the whole it seems quite clear that the name kimtdpa is understood to 
belong to the whole collection which varies somewhat in extent and arrangement 
in each of the texts that employ it, but that* the name was sometimes em- 
ployed for one or two of the initial hymns; in the latter case the specific 
designations of the opening hymns were more or less suppressed, although 
they were probably well knoyui in each of the schools. 

In addition, to AV. only SS. gives the /^;;^;z/^?/^-niaterials in full: the other 
texts (AB. GB. AS. Vait.) give only the pratikas, with an occasional stanza in full; 
the KB. does not even cite the pratikas but mentions the subdivisions under 
their specific designations {ndrdsa/nsyak, etc.). The kimtdpa-teMs in the SS. 
(12. 14 ff.) read like an extract from the AV. in an arrangement markedly 
different; this version also underlies the statements of KB. 30., 5 being 

therefore the traditional material in vogue in the school of the Sankhayanas 
or KausTtakins. All the stanzas, riddles, and answers of the SS. appear also 
in the much larger collection of the AV., excepting the bracketed st. 7 in 
SS. 12. 21. I, which occurs on the maigin of some mss.,, being omitted by 
others altogether In many cases the readings of the SS. mss. agree with 
those at the basis of the vulgata: Hillebrandt has frequently adopted 
the corrections proposed by the editors of the vulgata ^ The remaining texts, 
AB. GB. AS. Vait., presuppose a version nearly if not quite identical with the 
AV.: the few differences are almost entirely in the nature of variant readings 
whose substantiality however is often rendered suspicious by the ,exceeding 
corruption of the text of the kuntdpa'*^ In some respects the, ,AS. handles 
its materials, as might be expected, rather in , accordance with SS. than AV., 
e. g., in its treatment of the aitasapraldpa^ AS, 8. 3. 14 — 17 (see below). 

The litur^'ic tradition of the kuntdpadastra corresponds obviously to the 
natural subdivisions according to subject-matter in the kuntapa^jmm> themselves: 
their treatment therefore from the combined points of view of hymns and 
ritual is imperative. The following division of the hymns as reported in the 
AV. appears to be founded upon their intrinsic contents as well as their 
use in the sastras : 

I AV. 20. 127. I — 3 == SS. 12. 14, 1—3. St. I in AS. 8. 3. 10; its 
pratika, GB. 2. 6. 12; Vait. 32. 19. The AB. 6. 32. 3fF. (cp. also i), KB. 30. 5, 
as also the commentators generally (e. g. at SS. 12. 16. i), designate these 
stanzas as nardsamsyaJj, (sc. rcaJi). The subject is a fabulous danastuti in 
praise of Kaurama, a prince of,the Rusamas^. See SBE. XLII. 197, 690, 

IL AV. 20. 127. 4—6 SS. 12. 14. 4 — 15. I (in different order). The 
pratika in GB. 2. 6. 12. The GB., AB. 6. 32. 7 ff. (cp. also i), KB. 30. 5, 
and the comms. designate them as raibliyah. The theme is the praise of 
Rebha (Agni) 'who bestows cattle and wealth, or an exhortation to a huma!-. 
chanter (poet.) to perform his functions. A comparison of the chanter with 
Agni is involved in any case. See SBE. XLII. 197, 690 ff. 

III. AV. 20. 127. 7— '10 = SS. 12, 17. I. I — 4,.^ The pratika in GB. 
2. 6. 12, The GR, AB. 6. 32. 10 ff. (cp, also i), SS,, KB. 30. 5, and the 
comms. designate them as pdrikfitydh. Praise of Agni Pariksit, the typical god 
of Bralimanical piety^. See SBE. XLII. 197, 691 ff. 

IV. AV.20, 127. II, — 14 — ' SS, 12. 15. 2 — 4^°. The pratika in GB. 2. 6. 12, 
The GB., AB. 6. 32. i6ff. (cp. also i), KB. 30. 5, and the comms. designate 
them kdravydiu Exhortation of the poet by Indra who, as reward for a song 
of praise, grants wealth and destroys enemieo. See SBE. XLII. 198, 692. 

Indo-Aryan Research. II. is. 7 



98 11 . Literature and History, i b. AtharvaA-eda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 

V. AV, 20, 128. I — s ===== SS. 12. 20, I. I — S- The pratTka in GB. 2. 6.12. 

The GB., AB. 6. 32. 19 €, KB. 30.7, SS., and the comms. designate them as 
disam klptayah, ‘arrangement of the directions of space, orientation'. The 
paragraph consists of didactic stanzas in which certain kinds of conduct 

are correlated with the five directions of space, prdk^ adhardk, udak, apdk^ 
and, apparently, urdhvam as ‘the fifth, implied in the words, divam iva ga- 
tvdya^ in st 5. Proper conduct seems to be associated in i, 3, S with prdk^ 
udak^ and urdhvam, improper conduct in 2, 4 with adharak, and apdk. The 
possible pejorative sense of the last two in contrast to the good sense of the 
other three seems to be the, main point of these wise saws, but the untrust- 
worthiness of the text (cp. SS.) renders this entire construction problematic. 
St. i: ‘The man of good house, of rich establishment, who presses (the soma) 
and brings sacrifices, as well as yonder sun, the illustrious gods fixed as 
east'”. The opposite kind of a man (a stingy one) is correlated in st. 4 
with ‘west’ (apdk), 

VI. AV. 20. 128. 6 — II == SS. i2,,2i. 2. I-— 6. The pratika in GB.2.6.12. 

The GB., AB. 6. 32. 23 ff., KB. 30. 7, SS., and the comms. designate them as 
janakalpdh, ‘containing the classification of folk’, or the like. The subject is 
didactic and related to the preceding: desirable and undesirable folks are 
compared in classes. E. g. sts. 8, 9: ‘A lake without watering-place, ,a rich 
man who is stingy, and an unseductive, ugly maid are of like character; of 

like character (on the other hand are also) a lake with a good watering- 

place, a liberal rich man, and a seductive, beautiful maid’. The classification 
in sts. 10, II of the parivrktd mahist and the vdvatd mahi(i, of a slow and a 
swift horse, and the obscenity which appears here, as also frequently in the sequel, 
suggest conditions similar to the notorious practices at the ahmncdha and piirih 
samedha. Indeed the three abusive stanzas {aUUabhdsanam) i o, 8, 6 (inverse order), 
are employed SS. 16. 13. 10 in the course of the purusamedha; cp. Vait. 38. 2. 

VIL AV. 20. 128. 12 — 16 === SS. ]2. 15. I. 5 — 12. 16. i. 2 (sts. 14, 16 

of AV. wanting in SS.). The pratika in GB. 2. 6. 12. The GB., AB. 6, 32. 

25 ff., KB. 30. 5, and the comms. designate them indragathdlu The theme 
is praise of Indra, the conqueror^ of demons and enemies. 

Vin. AV. 20.* 12977132. SS. has only a limited number of these padas: 
AV. 20. 129. I — 10 = SS. 12. 18. I. I — 9; AV. 20, 132. 2 — 7, 9, II, 12 
SS- 12. 18. I. 10 — 18; AV. 20. 131. 10, II === SS. 12. 18, I. 19, 20. The AS. 
8. 3. 14—17 presents the same three groups of stanzas as appear in SS., 
giving as pratlkas SS. 12. 18. i. i and 10, followed by 19 and 20 in full^^. 
In AB. 6. 33. 2; GB. 2. 6. 13; Vait 32. 20 the pratika appears; AB., GB., 
SS., KB. 30. 5, and the comms. designate it as aiiasapraldpa {px etaia^) ‘the 
chatter of Aitasa’*^. The Brahmana-texts j)resent mystic, apologetic legends 
in explanation of this chatter of the sage Aitasa, designed to show its great 
Hturgic power. But there is certainly no basis in the text itself for a sage 
Aitasa. Either the name was abstracted verbally from the initial words 

or the variegated horse of the sun, etasa, is supposed to underlie the 
enigmatic ibrahmodya) nonsense of the text The first part, has been rendered 
tentatively and without explanation by Zimmer, p. 131. 

IX. AV. 20. i33 = SS. 12. 22, where an additional riddle^ without answer 
is added by some mss. (st 7). The pratika, GB. 2, 6. 13; AS. 8. 3. 18; Vait 

32. 21. The answers to these riddles are inserted in AV., are stated separately 
AS. 8. 3. 19; Vait 32/^25, but are altogether absent from SS. The GB,, AB. 6. 

33. 16, KB, 30, 7, SS., and the comms. designate them as pravalMkdb^^, 
‘riddles’; by propounding them the gods (d la Sphinx) got the better of the 
Asuras. In the AV. the riddle is given first, then the answer, and finally it 



Ill Contents of the Atharva-Veda in the SahnakIya-School. 


99 


curious refrain, addressed apparently to an (innocent) girl who is thus instructed 
in these jeux d^esprit. In the sastra the riddles seem to be chanted by the 
Hotar, the answers figuring as pratigaras in the mouth of the Adhvaryu who 
addresses the Hotar as jarttar. These riddles are either obscene or naive 
folk productions. Of the latter sort are 3 and 4: ‘By drawing two little ears 
to oneself they are gotten out in the middle (: what is it?)’. Answer: ‘The 
tying of a knot in a rope’. Tn what lies stretched out there is hidden that 
which stands (: what is it?)k Answer: ‘The foot in the shoe’. 

X. AV. 20. 134 = SS. 12. 23, I, where only four of ^ these riddles are 
given (i — 3, 6 of the answers in SS. 12. 23. 3. AS. 8. 3. 20 has the 

pratika of the hymn: the answers to the same four as appear in SS. are 
given as pratigaras in 8, 3. 21. Vait. 32. 22 has the pratika: the answers to 
all six in the order i — 3, 6, 5, 4 in 32. 25. The pratika also in GB.2. 6. 13. 
The GB., AB. 6. 33. iSff. (omitted in KB. 30. 7), and the comms. designate 
them as djijndsmydh ‘puzzles’. They' are riddles derived from the vegetable 
and mineral kingdoms. Riddle 4: ‘Well, here it is, east, west, north, and 
south; as soon as you touch it it melts (or vanishes: wh^t is it?)’. Answer: 
‘A drop’. 

XL AV. 20. 135,1 — 3 ~ SS. 12. 23. 2 with the answers {pratigaras) 
in 3. The pratika, AS. 8. 3. 22: the answers in 23; the pratika, Vait 32. 23: 
the answers^ in 25; the pratika also, GB. 2. 6. 13. The GB., AB. 6. 33. 19, 
KB. 30. 7, SS., . and the comms. designate them as pratirddka ‘hindrance, 
handicap*. They are three riddles from the animal and vegetable kingdoms, 
typifying the actions of quick arrival, swift disappearance, and firm standing. 
Riddle i : ‘Bounce, he has come (: what is it?). Answer: ‘The dog*. 2. ‘Whist, 
it is gone (: what is it?)’. Answer: ‘The fall of the leaf’. 3. ‘Bang, it has 
trodden (: what is it?)’. Answer:, ‘The hoof of an ox’. 

XII. AV. 20. 135. 4, 5 = SS. 12. 23. 4, 5. The pratika, AS. 8. 3. 23: 
the pratigaras in 24. The pratika, Vait. 32. 26: the pratigaras in 27. The 
pratika also, GB. 2. 6. 13. The GB., AB. 6, 33. 20, KB. 30. 7, and the comms. 
designate it as ativdda ‘outtalking’. Seems also to be a riddle or two with 
obscene answers (cp. AV. 20. 136^. ^4, et ah). 

XIII. AV. 20. 135. 6-=;-io == SS. 12. 19. I — 5 = AB. 6. 35. 5 ff. — GB. 

2, 6 . 14^7, The pratika, AS. 8 . 3. 25 Vait 32. 28. The AB., GB. designate 

it as devamtkai the SS., KB. 30. 6, as dditydngirasya^'^^. The subject seems 

to be an interesting dkkydna, indicated fragmentarily in the stanzas, but fitting 
well in to the story as told in the Brahmanas. According to this the Angiras, 
ordinarily inferior and hostile to the Adityas^®, once helped them at a soma- 
sacrifice. For this the Adityas gave to the Angiras the white horse of the 
sun as sacrificial reward. The devanJtha is therefore a heavenly idnastutk 

XIV. AV. 20. 135. II — 13 *== SS. 12. 16. I. 3 — 5 in changed order (st 

13 of AV. also AG. 2, 9. 4). The pratika, GB. 2. 6. 14; AS. 8. 3. 27; Vait 

32. 30. The GB., AB. 6. 36. i ff., KB. 30. 5, and the comms. designate them 
as bhutechadai. (AB., asurdndni bkuta^ii chddayitvd). The passage is in praise 
of India, 

XV. AV. 20. 136 = SS. 12, 24. 2 (sts. 4, I, 2, II, 10, 9, 6, 15 of AV., 

to which are added AV. 20. 137, 2 and i). The pratika, GB. 2^. 6. 15; AS. 
8. 3. 28; Vait 32. I. The GB., AB. 6. 36. 4 ff,, KB. 30. 5, SS., and ^the 
comms. designate them as dkanasydk (10 in number according to AB., SS. ; 
cp. schol. AS. 8, 3. 31), Sts. I and 4 occur also VS. 23. 28, 29; IS. 9. 10. 
5, 6, in the course of the asvamedka^ and the theme of dkanasyd^^ 
‘lechery’ (dhanasydd vai retak sicyaie^ AB. 6. 36. 5), is an even more out- 
spoken variety oi asUlahhdsamm than that familiar at In 

7 * 



I oo II. Literature and History; i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahm ana. 


E-ig-vidhana 3. 24. 4 the dhana^yak are recited over a woman who runs about 
with other men; cp. Meyer’s introduction, p, xv, xvii. 

The are preceded in the AV. by the vrsakapiAv^xmi (126) 

and foliowed by the dddhikra-^lzmjss (13 7- 3 ff-)? exactly as in the Bralimanas 
and Sutras. Their preservation is therefore due to the presence in the sastra- 
kanda (book 20) of the hymnal material recited primarily in the RV. schools 
on the sixth day of the prsthy(zsad(iha, a sacrificial week of six days belonging 
to the so-called ahJna-s,z.cnfiCts^ lasting from 2 to 1 2 days. The prsjhyasadaha 
is a part of the dvddasdha^^, ^fhe entire series of hymns in question, the 
so-called silpas ‘works of art’ (AB, 6. 27 if.) bear a popular character. As 
regards the hintdpa--^\tc^t%^ their presence in the ritual is taken with the 
utmost seriousness by the ritualists, though not without a,poiogies for their 
disgusting, foolish, and obscene character. Thus GB. 2. 6, 12 etymologizes upon 
kuntdpa as knisitam yat iapati Toathsome and offensive’, and the nonsense 
of the aitasapraldpa is whitewashed by liturgic legends (see above). The 
entire material bears the impress of a fossil in the midst of an honest serious 
performance: it is something which must have stood outside in a prehistoric 
period of the sacrifice, being connected with it at first by looser, more accid- 
ental ties, until the rigid formalism of which the existing texts are the final 
expression had placed everything upon the same footing of sanctity. The 
nursery-charade and the song of the brothel cannot reasonably be supposed 
to have found its way into the Srauta-ritual in any other way. Traces of 
such extra-Brahmanical doings occur in connection with many other Srauta- 
sacrifices, notably the nljasuya^ asvamedha^ and purusa7ncdha^^: they, as 
indeed most other sacrifices, mark the presence of popular customs and 
festivities encrusted within Brahmanical solemnities. One source of the more 
natural human element in the sacrifice was unquestionably the daksind^ the 
priests’ reward. The ddnastutis even in the RV. betray the exhilarated frame 
of mind of those that received the daksmd. The exaggerated statements of 
gifts received were not only intended to stimulate future givers, but mark the 
note of festivity. Closely related to the ddnastutis are the gdthd Jidrdiafhsyali^ 
or gdthdli and ndrdsamsyahy ‘stanzas which sing thef praises of generous men’, 
in the Brahmanas and Sutras^. They sing them so loudly that the texts in 
their soberer moments decry them as anria 7 n ‘lies’ (KS. 14. 15), ia77ialam 
‘pollution’ (TB. 1.3. 2. 6) in the last-mentioned place the reciter of the 

gdthd iidrdsaihsi^ and the man drunk with surd are placed on the same level: 
they are polluted, their gifts must not be accepted. Now the merry and 
unsavory literature of the ku 7 itdpa-V 2 a:\tty is likely to have been associated 
yith ddTiasiuti^ fidrasaiiisi^ and dkhyd 7 ia (see already RV. 1. 126, and 8. i.3o£), 
just as the obscene practices — in part to be sure symbolic — of the 
a£va 7 n€dha follow upon tlie great and festive slaughter of cattle customary 
on that occasion. And it is noteworthy that both asva77ied/ia and purusa^ 
77 iedha are the special repositories of 7 idrasa?hsaX\ttXdXm^^^. 

The dd 7 iastutis and 7 idrdia 7 Hszs are therefore one of the more hilarious 
elements which tended to bridge over from the solemn acts of the sacrifice 
to what for lack of a better term we might call a kind of liturgic ‘saukneipe’. 
Plainly speaking, the bestowal of the daksmd in many instances must have 
lead to gormandizing and drunkenness, and these were probably in turn 
followed the pi*actice is not entirely unknown in our days — - b,y shallow 
witticisms, by obscene talk, and worse. This we must not imagine to have taken 
place uninterruptedly without sporadic recollection of the religious character of 
the event (cp. tlic theosophic and cosmogonic bralmtodya at the asvaTnedha)^^ 1 
in the inain however social jollification was the motive, until, in the course of the 



IV. Gopatha-Brahmana. — A. Relation to A.-V. and Vedic Literature, ioi 


ossification of the ritual, even the most trivial moments marched past in the 
procession of the sacrifice, misunderstood knd suspected, but now as sacred 
and ineradicable as the most thoughtful prayer to the gods, 

I Roth, Abhandhmg, p. 7, 21, 32; AV. inKaschmir, p. 6, 8, 23; Haug, Aita- 
reya-BrShmapa, Translation, p. 430, note; WL.^, p. 162, note. The kuntapasuhiani 
are wanting in the AVP., and are the only hymns of which a pada-version does 
not exist. — 2 kuntapakhyam suktam khile ki^niapanamake granihe samammtam 
trimsadrcam (AB. 6. 32. ^l); htntdpattdmakam trim sadr earn suktam (AB. 6. 33. l). — 

3 The commentary at SS. 12. 16 is however well acquainted with the terms nara- 
samsyak^ etc., as Is also KB. 30. 5 which defines them explichly as subdivisions of 
the kuniapa. — 4 The order narasarnsz^ raibht, kdrmyd, indragdtka^ bhuiechadah, etc., 
KB. 30. 5, is precisely that of the sa7nhitd-^^x%\on^ ^S. 12. 14 ff. — S See HiLLE- 
BRANDT^s edition, vol. I, p. 261; vol. ill, p. 165. ^ See ibid. I; p. 259; cp. Roth, 

Abhandlung, p. 7. — 7 Thus AB. 6. 35. 15 ff. omits the pada, idam radho vibhu prabh% 
which appears AV. 20. T 35.9c; GB. 2, 6. 14^, The first of the two pratigaras to the 
so-called rt//2^5ifh-stanza, AV. 20. 135. 4; vSS. 12. 23.4,;, GB. 2. 6. 13; AS. 8. 3. 23 ; Vait. 
32.26, are given in the forms, paitiJ ylyapsyamana, SS. 12. 23. 5; painl ylyapsyate, AS. 
8.3. 24; pairit yad drsyate, Vait. 32. 27: the formulas are omitted by the editors, AV. 
20. 135. 5. -“8 Cp.* Zimmer, p, 129,259. — 9 Possibly only a human king: Zimmer, 
p. 131; Oldenberg, DLZ, 1897, col. 370. — JO St. 14 of AV. is wanting there, 
but it is alluded to AS, 8. 3. 8 and 12 (the commentary quotes it corruptljr as, 
upa VO nara enamasil). Stanza 12 is common: AB. 8. II. 5? IS. 3. 3. 2; Apb. 9. 

17. I; SMB. I. 3. 13; GG. 2. 4. 6; ApMB. i. 9. I (ApG. 2. 6. lO); cp. also PG. 
I. 8i 10; HG. I. 22. 9. — JJ PiscHEL, Ved. Stud. I. 302 ; Bloomfield, JAOS. XIX. 

18. — According to A^. and Say. to AB. 6. 33. i this passage (the alias apralapd) 

consists of 70 padas, sdkhantare. AS. 8. 3. 1$ reports as an alternative 18 padas 
(doubtless = 12. 3. 18. 1—18), or even the- first 9 (doubtless == SS. 12.3, 18. 

1—9). The AB. 6. 33. 6 is also acquainted with alias apraldpas of different extent; 
cp. the schol. ibid. J3 KB. 30, 5; 6S. 12. 7. 3 write ftasa. — ^4 Cp. the ^5^- 
plavam dkhyanam of the asvamedhay ^B. 13. 4. 3. 2— 15; AwS. 10. 6. loff.; SS. 16. 
I. 22 ff.; L6. 9.9. 10 ff, which, hovrever, is not nonsense. — ^5 Cp. the samvatsara^ 
pravalha in the course of the abvamedha, a 5. 10. 5. 7; 16.26.4, and the riddle- 

hymn RV. 8. 29, known as manupravalha, — In the Atharvan mss. sts. 4r 5 ®f 
the vulgata seem to have formed part of hymn 135; se‘e the note in the edition. 
— J7 These stanzas occur also JB. 2. Ii6ff. — J® AwS. estimates the passage as 
consisting of 17 padas which corresponds with the subdivision of the dsvamtha^^ as 
given in Aufrecht’s edition of the AB. — ^9 So I would emend the unintelligible 
expression ddiiya anglrasya {evdhd) in Hillebrandt’s edition, SS, 12. 19. 5- 

20 See Weber, IS. 1. 176, 292; IStr. IL 470; III. 80; SPAW. 1891, p. 81 iff. — 
Cp. Weber, IS. IX. 307; Geldner, Ved. Stud. I. 280. — 22 gee Hillebrandt, 
Ritual-Litteratur, p. 148, 155. — n See Weber, Rajasuya, APAW., 1893, p. 4 > 67 
of the reprint; Hillebrandt, Festgruss an Otto von Bohtlingk, p. 40 ff Rffual- 
Litteratur, p. l49ff.— H Cp. Brhaddevata 3. 154, where danasiuti and ndrasamst are 
correlated. Both mrds'amsj and gathd as early as RV. 10. 85* et al. Elsewhere, 
ei g. TS. 7. 5. II. 2; SB. II. S- 6. 8; PB. 10. 6. 6; AG. 3- 3- 1 ff-J Yajnav. I. 45 5 
cp. SBE. XLII, p. 688—9. — ^5 Weber, Epmehes etc., ibid.^ p. 771 (5 of the re- 
print). — 2^ Weber, ibid. p. 772 ff., 776 ff. (p. 6, 10 of the reprint). — 27 Cp. Old^n- 
BERG, Religion des Veda, p. 248, 475. 

PART IV. THE GOPATHA-BRAHMANA. 

A. RELATION OF THE TEXT TO THE ATHARVA-VEDA 
AND ITS POSITION IN VEDIC LITERATURE. 

§ 64. General remarks*. — The GB. like the Vaitana-Siitra does not 
favor us with a report of the name of its author or authors. It is divided 
into two parts, the purva-brskmana in five prapathakas, and the uUara- 
brah7nana in six prapathakas*. The purva shows considerable originality, 
especially when it is engaged in the glorification of the Atharvan and its 
priests; this is indeed its main purpose. Its materials are by no means ^1 of 
the usual Brahmana-charaeter; they broach frequently upon the domain of 



102 


II. Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


Upani§ad; indeed one passage, GB. i. i. i6 — 30, is practically identical with 
the Pranou (Prauava) Upanisad in Anquetil-Duperron’s Latin translation of 
the Persian Oupnekhat; another, GB. i. i. 31— 38, itself claims the title of 
Upanisad {1.1.38, end); see and 68fF. Nor are they presented in accord 
with and in the order of the sacrifice (yapia/crama) either in Vait. or any other 
Srauta-text. The uttara, on the other hand, follows in the main the order of 
Vait. by compiling from various sources a fairly connected Brahmana to 
accompany the action of Vait. This is attended inevitably by Atharvanic 
adaptations, sporadic, hap-hazard, and imperfect, both as regards subject- 
matter and mantras: the scrappy character of the product is evident on the 
surface. In a general way the uttara in its relation to Vait may be compared 
with the relation of the first nine books of SB. to the original nucleus of the 
VS. (books I— 18); the purva being comparable with (as it is to some extent 
dependent upon) the remaining five books of SB. 3 Both parts, however, are 
very late productions, one cannot say from how recent a century; both parts 
were composed after Vait, resting upon a most slender basis of ancient Athar- 
vanic tradition: the uttara, moreover, leaves the impression of a date still later 
than the purva. Thus the usual chronological relations in the redaction of 
Brahmana, Srauta-sutra, and Gfhya-sutra are turned about in^the Atharvan: the 
Kausika (Grhya-sutra) was composed before the Vaitana (Srauta-sutra)^, the 
Vaitana before the GB., — the cone is inverted and balances upon a mere point 
of genuine Atharvanic tradition as far as both Vait. and GB. are concerned. 

S 65. The Uttara-Brahmaua. — The history of this production is well 
illustrated by its treatment of the cdiurmdsydni^ or seasonal offerings, sections 
2. I. 19 — 26 of GB. These are purloined with slight modifications from KB., 
being its fifth book in toto. The Vait. treats this subject in 8. 8 — 9. 27, and 
there are, of course, correspondences between it and GB,, due to the sameness 
of the subject Thus Vait. 8. 8 is literally identical with the opening of GB. 
2. 1. 19. The GB. does not mention the mantras of Vait, except that it 
works in the two formulas, svadhd, and, asiu svadh^ (Vait 9. ii), in 
2. I. 24. The adaptation is most superficial; at any rate, there can be no 
question that - this part of GB. was composed subsequently to both Vait and 
KB. Even more characteristic is the treatment of the atirdtra (soma-sacrifice), 
GB. 2. 5. I — 5. This is compiled from two sources, AB. 4. 5 and 6, and 
KB. 17,7 — 9, baldly put down, one after another, without any attempt to 
harmonize. Thus the three paryayas (periods) of the atirdtra^zx^ explained 
twice as typifying the successive expulsion of the Asuras from the three 
periods of the night, once in the words of AB. 4. 5, the second time in the 
words of KB. 17. 8. Very striking, too, is GB. 2. 3. ii, illustrating in the 
coume of the agnistom 'a the passage Vait. 21. 3.4: the Brahmana is 
copied with slight alterations from KB, 1 1 . 4 and 5 ; the compiler is not even 
ait pains ^ to expunge the expression, iti ha smdka kaufdaki^^ which of itself 
betrays its origin. Indeed throughout the text the Atharvavedin borrows the 
Rishis along with the passages in which they figure. Again, cases of un- 
disgmsed pilfering are the three kdmyestayal^^ GB. 2,1. 13 — 5, which reproduce 
almost verbatim MS. 2. i. 10, and the statement about the mvdhdrya, GB. 
2. I, 6, taken from MS. i, 4. 6 (p. 54, 1 . 3 ff.). These are specimen cases: the 
uttara exploits especially AB. and KB., but other Brahma^ias, SB,, TS,, MS., 
and even PB., are not exempt from depredation. 

Stated numerically, about 80 of the 123 sections of the uttara owe their 
materials either entirely or largely to older texts, as far as is known now. 
Doubtless future search will reveal still other instances of the dependence of 
GB., sinqe there are at present no regular channels for investigations of this 



IV. Gopatha-Brahmana. — A. Relation to A.-V. and Vedic Literature. 103 


kind. The correspondences stated in the order of the uttara are: 2. i. i : 
KB. 6. 13; — 2. I. 3 (latter half); KB. 6. 14 (beginning); — 2. i. 4; TS. 2. 

6. 9; — 2, I. 6: MS. I. 4. 6 (p. 54, 1 . 3 if.); — ■ 2. i. 9, very similar to TS. 

2. 5. 5. I if.; — 2. I. 10 (beginning): Kaus. i. 29, 30; — 2. i. ii: TS. 2. 5. 

5. 2 if; — 2. I. 13 — 15: MS. 2. I. 10; - 2. I. 18: MS. 3. 3. 7 (p. 40, 1 . 2if.); 

— 2. I. 19 — 26: KB. 5 (entire); — 2. 2. 2 — 4: TS. 6. 2. 2. iff; — 2. 2.6: 
AB. I, 18; — 2. 2. 13: TS. 3. 5. 2. i; — 2. 2. 20 — 22: AB. 6. 10 (complete), 

6. II. 6 if, and 6. 12. 6ff ; — 2. 3. 1—6: AB. 3. 5 — 8; — 2. 3. 6 (latter 

half): AB. 7. 33. 5 if; — 2. 3. 7, 8: AB. 2. 29, and 6. 14. 5; — 2-. 3. 10: 
AB. 3. 12; — 2. 3. ii: KB. II. 4, 5; — 2. 3. 12: AB. 3. 14; — 2. 3. 17 — 19: 
MS. 4. 8. 3; — 2. 3. 20, 21: AB. 3. 23; — 2. 3. 22: AB. 3. 24; — 2, 4. 5: 
AB. 6. 3. 8 — ii; — 2. 4. 6: KB. 18. 7, 8; — • 2. 4. 8: TS. 3. 3. 8. 2 if.; 

2. 4. 9: TS. 3. 3. 8. 4 if; — 2. 4. 10: AB. 3. 44; — 2. 4. 19; AB. 4. i.,5— 8; 

— 2. 5. I — 3: AB. 4. 5, 6; — 2. 5. 4 — 5: KB. 17. 7—9; — 2. 5. 6: SB. 12. 

8. 3. I, 2; — 2. 5, 7 : SB. 12. 8. 3. 23 — 28; — 2. 5. 8: PB. iS. 7; — 2. 5. 1 1: 

AB. 6. 17. I, 2, and 6. 5; — 2. 5. 12: AB. 6. 6; — 2. 5. 13; AB. 6. 7; — 

2. 5. 14: AB. 6. 8; — 2. 5. 15: AB. 6. 18. 4 if, introduced by a sentence from 
AB. 6. 17. 2, and ending in a passage from AB. 6. 17. 3, 4; — finally of the 
16 sections of -the sixth prapathaka all except one and a half (2. 6. 6, and 
the first half of 2. 6. 7) are entirely or largely dependent upon the fifth and 
especially the sixth book of AB. These 80 sections do not mark the limit 
of the materials in the uttara that can lay no claim to originality. Thus GB. 
2. I. 16; 2. 9; and. 2. 12 are apparently nothing but Brahmanized extracts 
from Vait. itself, respectively, ii. i; 15. 3; and 16. 15 — 17; there are also 
other verbal correspondences between Vait. and GB. which suggest the super- 
ficial creation of Brabmaija-matter directly out of the sutras of Vait. Again, 
quite a considerable number of sections, dealing with the sasiras of the three 
daily savanas (2. 3. 13 — 15; 2. 4. i — 3; and 2. 4. ii — 8) seem to be little 
more than the statements of the RV.-sutos worked over slightly into Brahmaija 
form; cp., e. g., GB. 2. 4. i — 3 with SS. 7. 22 — 24; AS. 7. 4. iff. Future in- 
vestigations on the part of a second editor of GB. will doubtless narrow 
down the limits of the original matter of the uttara to a minimum. 

Just as the uttara presupposes the older Brahmanas, so it is no less 
certainly based upon the existing text of the Vaitana. One may say, in 
accordance with the paradoxical inter-relation of these secondary Atharvan 
texts, that to some extent the Vait figures, as it were, as the SamhitaofGB. 
Thus original mantras of Vait., or, at any rate, mantras stated in full, are 
frequently cited in the uttara by their pratTka. The Brahmana is not consistent 
in these matters: the long yajus, Vait 3. 20, is repeated in full GB. 2. i, 7, 
but the formulas, Vait 3. 14; 4. 16, are cited by prafika, GB. 2. i. 3 and 4. 
Similarly the gharina-sukta from AVP. is given in full Vait 14. i, but its 
pratika only appears GB. 2. i. 6. Note especially GB. 2. 2. 12 and 18 where 
the mantras ofVaiti6.i7 and 18. ii are cited fragmentarily, with explanations 
in the manner of SB. when engaged in expounding mantras of VS. Very 
characteristic, too, for the priority of Vait is GB, 2. i. 16 which treats its 
theme out of order and connection, whereas in Vait ii. i it properly intro- 
duces the agnistoma. 

Nevertheless the uttara has certainly some, though probably very few original 
sections. Thus the prdsitraAtgtrA., GB.2.1.2, though based upon materials from 
older texts, betrays itself as an Atharvanic fabrication by the introduction of the 
clap-trap Rishis, Idhma Angirasa, and Barhi Angirasa, leading up to Brhaspati 
Aiigirasa who, of course, represents the Atharvanic (fourth) priest Section 2.2.5 
starts with an explanation of the word makha in Nirukta-manner, leading up 



1 04 11. Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


to one of those disquisitions on the defects of the sacrifice (common in the 
purva) which can be corrected only by the glorified Bhrgvahgirovid. Cp. 
also certain touches in 2. i. 17; 2. 6, 14, 15; 3. 9, etc. In addition the 
originality of the uttara consists in a certain freedom in transfusing the diction 
of the Brahmauas which it has borrowed; in assimilating some — though by 
no means all — of their sayings to Atharvanic conditions; and, above all, 
in changing in no small measure the mantras cited in these firahmanas to 
those in vogue with the Atharvans. Thus in 2. i. i, a passage borrowed 
from KB. 6. 13, the formula, idam aham. arvavasoli^ is changed to, idam aham 
arvagvasoli (Kaui 3. 7; 137. 39); in the stomabhagaAtgtViA^ TS. 3, 5, 2. i, 
the GB. 2, 3. 13 omits, tasmdd vdsistho bra/md kdryah^ because its ideal of 
a Brahman-priest is a Bhrgvahgirovid. Other adaptations of this sort, at times 
quite clever, more often superficial and bungling, will appear in the analysis 
of the text that is to follow. 

S 66, The Pur-va-Brahmana. — The most conspicuous feature of the 
first part of the GB. is that it does not follow at all the order {yajnakramd) 
of the Vait, nor. is its object in the main the illustration of the normal kinds 
of Sraiita-sacrifices. It is, to begin with,; also a large borrower, but the source 
drawn upon is ^ almost exclusively the Satapatha-Brahmana (books 1 1 and 1 2). 
From the beginning of the fourth prapathaka through to i. 5. 22 the text 
seems to be nothing but a secondary mouthing over of a considerable part of 
the 12*^ book of SB. The subject is a mystic, theosophic treatment of the 
sattra of the year and other forms of the soma-sacrifice. Though there is 
some degree of independence on the part of GB., both in the wording, and 
in an occasional mantra, there can be in this part no question of independent 
Atharvan school-tradition; nor can the subject as treated by both texts be 
referred to a common earlier source. The GB. purloins the ‘ materials of the 
SB. quite undisguisedly ; occasionally only it infuses into them those special 
Atharvanic traits which that text affects: the praise of the fourth Veda, the 
mention of Atharvan, Angiras, Bhrgu, etc.; see, e. g,, GB. 1.4. 24; 5. 10, n, 
15, 19. The dependence in general of the Vait. upon the school of* the 
white YV. ensures a certain correspondence with the treatment of the sattra 
in Vait. 31—34; but this is no more in the nature of close companionship 
than is the case in the relation of SB. 12 to its Samhita (VS.). Aside from 
this, only the eleventh book of SB. and a section or two of the AB have 
been exploited by GB.: i. 3. 2: AB, 5. 32. Sfh; t 3- 3: AB. 5. 32 s— 
33- 4;,— I. 3* 4: AB. s. 31. Iff.; -- i. 3. 6—10: SB. 11. 4. i; _ j 3 ^ 
12: SB. II. 5. 3. 1-7; _ X. 3. 13, 14: SB. II. 5. 3. 8 ff.; - I. 3. 18: Ab! 

7. I. 


The last three sections of the purva are metrical, and not far removed 
from the type of Parisista; they are, apparently, not from one and the same 
hand. They do not bear upon the individual acts of the ritual, but seem 
to be a statement of the position and beliefs of the Atharvans in regard to 
the general aspects of Vedic lore and sacrifice, with the special purpose of 
defimng and . glorifying the AV. This, indeed, is the leading theme of the 
pum as a whole; to this it adheres throughout the considerable variety of 
subjects which are handled in the first three prapathakas, whether, they are 
cosmogonies, specuMons in Upanijad style, comments on sacrificial details, 
g’ai^atical disquisitions (r. i. 24 — 28), or even statements in the manner of 
the Car^vyuha (i. i. 29). To carry to the front the AV. and the fourth 
pnest (the so-caBed Brahman), who must be an Atharvangirovid, and to point 
to failure and discomfiture in all holy concerns managed without the fourth 
Veda, IS beyond question the original motive underlying the production of 



IV. The Gop ath a-Brahm ana. — A. Relation to A.-V. and V edic Literature, i o 5 


the Atharvan Brahmana. Every tetrad is a veritable god-send to the author 
or authors. Whether it be the four-footed animal (i. 2. 24); four metre? 
(often); the sacred syllable <?;//, divided artificially into four moras (i. i. 16); 
the cosmic tetrads, earth and fire; atmosphere and wind; heaven and sun; 
moon and waters (i. i. 29, et al); or psycho-physical tetrads like speech, 
breath, sight, and mind (i. 2. ii; 3. 14): they are all pressed into service to 
show. the inherent need and primordiality of the catur-veda, as stated most 
formally i. i. 16. Occasionally, yet quite familiarly (i. 2, 21, 24; 5, io;cf. 
also I. I. 7 and i. 3. 3), 'the fourfold Veda is expanded into the Atharvanic 
pentad by dividing the AV. into two, sdnta. ==* atharvan^ and ghora ~ angiras 
(see p. 8). These two assume such reality in the mind of the author as to 
be furnished each with an independent vydhrtiy o?n for the Atharvan, janat 
for the Angiras: between these two the vydhrtis of the trayJ {bhuhy bhuvahy 
svab) are placed for protection (gup)^. Very neat manipulations are carried on 
to this end, , as when GB. x. 4. 24 substitutes catvdro veddh for catuspddali 
pasavah in SB. 12. 2. 2. 20, or when GB. i* 5. 10 assumes the above-ment- 
ioned five Vedas for three in SB. 12. 3. 3. 2. That the GB. clearly associates 
the AV. and its functionaries with brdhjna in the sense of universal religion 
(sarvavidyd)y and brahma in the sense of universal theologian {sarvavid) 
may be gathered from i. 2. 18; 5. ii, 15, 19: see SBE. XLII, p. Liifif. 
above, $33- 

Though the purva, in distinction from the uttara, impresses one with a 
certain elemental, energetic independence in style and subject-matter; though it 
does not borrow as much and as bare-facedly as the uttara; though it does 
not make it its business to follow and illustrate any other Atharvan text; 
yet it is without question an exceedingly late production, and also presupposes 
Kaus. and Vait, as well as the SaunakTya-samhita in 20 books". Nor are 
its materials at all from the same hand, as may be seen on comparing, e. g., 
the opening cosmogony, i. i. i — 15, with the second part, i. i. 16— -30, the 
so-called Brauava-Upanisad. Section i. 2. 8 mentions the god Siva and is 
Pauranic. Section i. i. 28 mentions an evil divinity Do§apati, who figured 
as a Rishi at the beginning of the dvapara-zg(ty reminding us of Dusin, a 
name of the Buddhist devil Mara^. Sections i. x. 25—27 contain grammat- 
ical matters of an advanced type; i* i. 29 is in the nature of a Carana- 
vyuha, certainly very late. The proof that the purva came after Vait., just 
as Vait is later than Kaui, can be stated definitely and technically. In 
Vait 5. 10 two classes of plants, one Atharvanic (blessed, hoty), the other 
Angirasic (terrible, sorcery-plants), are mentioned; the latter, unknown to 
Kaui, is catalogued in full; the former, having been stated, Kaus. 8. 16, is 
merely alluded to with the words, cityddibhir dfharz/ambhib^. GB. i. 2. 18, 
in its turn, having both Kaui and Vait behind it, is content to allude to 
both classes with the vague words dtharz/ambhif cdhgirasibhis cai they would 
be unintelligible but for their reference to the preceding texts. Again, 

as in the case of the uttara, the purva at times treats Vait as its Satn- 

hita, as far as the mantras are concerned. Thus GB. i. i. 12 quotes the 
pada, agnir yajnam trivrtam saptatantumy from the Paippalada-hymn given 
in full, Vait 10. 17; and GB. i. 2. 18 (end) quotes by pratika the five 

stanzas, Vait 6. 1. Finally, aside from the general correspondence of subject- 

matter and terminology, as when, e. g., GB. x. 3. xx, 12 shares with Vah. 
important words unknown elsewhere^®, the GB. occasionally presents Bra- 
hmajgas which read like late notes on Vait Thus GB. i. 3. 17, describing 
the variety of agnistoma called ekagu^ is scarcely more than an after- 
thought to Vait. 24. 20; or GB. i. 2. 18 (second half) contains an Atharv- 



I o6 II. Literature andHistory. i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


anic legend clearly built upon Vait 5. 10, and^ more remotely, upon Kaus. 
8 and -9. 

Yet the purva is not devoid of a certain originality. The cosmogony, 
I. I. 1—15; the Prariava-Upanisad, i. i. 16 — 30; the GayatrT-Upanisad, 1. i. 
31 — 38; the sections on the duties of the Brahmacarin (rubricating AV. 11. 5) 
in I. 2. I — 9; the Brahmana of the ‘fire-footed horse' at the agnyadhdna in 
I. 2. 18 — 21, with quite a number of original words at the end of i. 2. 21; 
and other sections seem to represent a form of scholastic activity unknown 
elsewhere in this precise form. The list of subsidiary writings in i. 2. 10 
(i. 2. 9 of the edition), though again late in character, does not occur else- 
where in this arrangement and extent A somewhat independent statement 
of the yajnakrama is presented in i. $. 7. No Vedic text is wanting in 
independent mantras and formulas, or fails to introduce independent variants 
into such as are paralleled by other texts. In this regard the purva is much 
like other Brahmanas: i. i. 9 contains a mantra of Upanisad-character (srestko 
ha vedas)y repeated with variants by Sayana in his introduction to the AV., 
p. S, but otherwise unknown. In 1.1.39 the pratika, dpo garbhamjanayantih^ 
seems to be a version (Paippalada?) of AV. 4. 2. 8. In i. 2. 7 an expiatory 
mantra, recited by Brahmacarins in case they happen to step upon a burial- 
ground, is added to other prayakifta~%tmz2S which GB. shares with Vait. 
12. 8, 9. At the end of the same section (i. 2. 7) AV. ii. 5. 23 in its Paippa- 
4 ada form is presented in sakalapdtha\ similarly the mantra, catvdri irhgas 
(for srhgd^ RV. 4.58.3, et al), in 1.2.17*^ In i. 2. 9 the mantra, antarikse 
pathibhir etc., shows marked variants as compared with its parallel, RV. 10. 
168. 3; the formulas in i. 3. 13, do not occur in Vait, and differ from those 
in the corresponding passage, SB. ii. 5. 3. 8fF.;^the two stanzas at the end 
of I. 5. 5 also present variants as compared with SB. 12. 3. 2. 7 — 8, occurring 
nowhere else. Above all, the typical mantras at the three daily soma-offerings 
{iymo 'sz etc.) in r. 5. 12 differ not only from those of the corresponding 
passage, SB. 12.3.4.3 — 5, but also from those of the Saunaklya-samhita (AV. 
6. 48), and, as far as known, from all other versions of these formulas ’^3. 
And throughout the text, aside from the three metrical chapters 1.5.23 — 25, 
there are slokas and other metrical passages so clearly Atharvanic in 
character that they may not be expected to turn up in older texts (e. g. 
I. I, 32, end; cp.^2. 2. 5): their Parisista-character and their originality are 
equally obvious. 

The following brief account of the contents of the GB. follows the text 
section by section. The more or less original themes of the text are dealt 
with at greater length; the parts which are extracted with or without modi- 
fications and adaptations from other Brahmanas are dealt with very lightly: 
frequently a mere reference to the source from which the GB, has derived 
its material was found sufficient. 

The Gopatka-BrShmana of the Atharva-Veda. Edited by Rajendralala Mitra 
and Haracandra VinYABHtjSANA, Calcutta 1872. Critical remarks on the text of 
this edition: OxTO V. BoHriiNGK, BKSGW., April, 1896, p. I2ff, of the reprint; 
Bloomfield, JAOS. XIX, p. iff. The first account of the contents and character 
of the GB. appeared in Max Muller, HASL., p. 445—- 455 j cp. Colebrooke, Essays, 
' I*. 82; p. 167. 

I This and the following two paragraphs are based on the author’s article on 
the GB., JAOS. XIX, p. 3 — 1 1 . — 2 faifra gopatkah s'aiapr&pathakmn (!) brdhmanam 
dsiZ, iasyavasiste dve brdhmane purvam ttiiaram ra: Caranavyiiha, Ath. Pari§. 49, 
The existing text contains a total of only ii prapathakas. — 3 Cp, 
p. 118 and 130 ff. — 4 Bloomfield, JAOS. XI, p. '37511.; Hillebrandt, Ritual- 
Litteratur, p. 35 ff- — S Note also the passage beginning with, tad yathd lavanena^ 
GB. I. I. 14, which seems borrowed from Chand, Up. 4. 17- 7; and GB. l. 5. ii 



TV.. The Gopatha-Brahmana, — B. Contents of the Purva«Brahmana. 107 


end == Kaii§. 94. 3, 4. — 6 See the remark on janat^ below, § 67, note 9. For 
the Atharvans as gopidrafy^ see GB. i. I. 13. — 7 Cp. GB. I. I. 4, 5, 8, which 
allilde in a cloudy way to the finished diaskeuasis in 20 books (see $ 35). Note 
the contrast between ream mandalaih (RV.) and ream kandaih (AV.) in 2. 9. 
That the late Cara9.avySha-passage, I. I. 29, presents sam no devlk (AV. I. i. 6) 
as the initial stanza of the AV. does not militate against the view that the GB. 
belongs to the school of Saimaka, rather than to the Paippalada; see p. 14. The 
GB. is, however, not unacquainted with the Paippalada; see below. — ^ Windisch, 
Buddha und Mira, p. 151. Cp. also the asura papman^ as a personification of the 
evil principle, in Nrsimhottaropani§ad 6. — 9 Bloomfield, JAOS. XI. 387. — cp. 
for other cases of this kind, JAOS. XIX. lo, note 3. — Cp. similar lists in 
I. I. 10, 21, 23, 24; 3. 3, Cp. also 2* 2. 6. — ' Cp. Roth, Der AV. in Kaschmir 
p. 23, and see note 5 on p. 1 13. — '3 See Bloomfield, JAOS. XVI. i ff. 


B. CONTENTS OF THE PURVA-BRAHMANA 

S 67. First Prapathaka: i. i. i — 15. An Atharyanic cosmogony 
in Upanisad manner^ — The lonely Brahma decides to create a second 
god. By means of tapas sweat (sveda) is produced upon the Brahma’s browj 
this it pimningly and mystically^ regards as good knowledge (suvedd), 
alluding perhaps in this way to the Brahmaveda (i). Through continued 
iapas more sweat breaks in streams {dhard) from the Brahma’s hair-sockets 
on account of which the Brahma proposes to sustain {dhdrayisydmi)^ create 
{janayisydmi), and obtain {dpsyami) this all. Through a chain of more or 
less irrelevant additional puns the creation of the waters {dpa^, punning with 
dpsyami) takes place. The waters are the element of the Atharvan throughout, 
just as its divinity is the moon 3 (2). In these waters he beholds his own 
reflection; his seed falls into the water. The Brahma belabors the waters 
until they are divided into two, the saline undrinkable ocean, and the sweet 
waters. The latter being heated, the seed in it is dried up {abhrjyatd)^ and, 
lo, we have the Atharvanic sage Bhrgu (3.). The Brahma vanishes; Bhrgu 
starts after it in various directions futilely, until the voice of the wind (Vata) 
tells him to look for it below {atharvan) in these waters. Therefore that 
became Atharvan and was exactly like Brahma (4). Brahma elaborates 
Atharvan into 10 Atharvan Rsis, respectively ekarca^ dvyrea^ etc., and 10 
Atharvaija Arseyas, respectively ekddada, dvddasa, etc. (symbolizing the 20 
books of the AV.)-^. From these the AV. is elaborated; from the latter the 
syllable om which (in the manner of the Upani§ads) can be made to assume 
the function and virtue of the entire AV. (5). After the creation of the Veda 
of Atharvan comes the regulation cosmogonic act whose final outcome is 
the trdyJ vidyd with its divinities, elements, and vydhrtis^ e. g., Rig-Veda, 
earth, Agni, and bhuh^ (6). Just as the seed in the sweet waters produced 
Bhirgu and in the sequel Atharvan, thus, next, the saline waters by successive 
cosmogonic acts (with puns) are made to yield the ocean {samudra)^ 
Varuna, Mrtyu (Mucya), and by extracting from the limbs of Mrtyu 

their sap {rasa) the final result, Ahgiras, is reached^. The origin of Ahgiras 
from the bitter waters of the ocean, next from Varuna who is taken here 
without doubt in his occasional sinister demoniac sense (as if Vl'tra)^, and 
finally from Mrtyn, is intended to turn forth the terrible side of the? Angirasa- 
Veda in contrast with the auspicious Atharvan and xAtharvana-Veda, derived 
above through Bhrgu. The latter is more particularly the substitute of 
Atharvan: bhrgvahgirasah — atharvdhgirasdb {7). From Jhe sage^Angiras the 
Brahma elaborates 20 Angiras Rsis^ and from tliem 10 Angirasa Arseyas, the 
latter correlated respectively with 16, 18, 12, i, 3, 4, 5, 6, 2, and 7 rcak. This 
again alludes to the diaskeuasis of the Veda, but why these numbers, and why 



I o8 IL Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 

this order? From the Ahgirasa-Veda comes the word janat which is the 
vyahrti of that Veda 9 (8). This is followed by an especial panegyric of the 
Ahgirasah, illustrated by a mantra of independent character*® (9). Brahma 
next elaborates from the six directions five other Vedas and from these 
the vyahrtis : sarpaveda and vrdhat\ ^tidcaveda and karat i asuraveda 
and guhat\ itihasaveda and inahat\ purdnaveda and tad^'^ fio). From the 
near . and distant regions he extracts iatn^ 'the high syllable’, urdhvam 
aksarapiy with allusion, doubtless, to the £dnta-veda (ii). Brahma continues 
to create the moon, stars, plants and trees, and from 'his minor breaths the 
many other gods’, winding' up with the ‘threefold, seven-stringed sacrifice 
consisting of 2 1 forms’. The text illustrates the latter by . citing a pada from 
the Paippaiada-hymn given in full Vait 10, 1.7, and by referring^ to the sloka- 
chapter, 03.1.5.25^(12). Brahma then institutes a sacrifice choosirig certain 
divinities as special Srauta-priests*^ Candramas the divinity of the AV. figures 
as Brahman-priest, the Atharvangirasah as a special variety of Brahmans, 
called goptdrak, jPrajapati recommends that abundant fees be given to such 
priests lest there be injury to the rivij\ sacrificer, and his offspring (13). 
Finally the functions of the Brahman-priest (and the goptdraJj) as curers 
{samdkdna) of the flaws of the sacrifice (viristd) are defined*^ (14, 15). The 
entire cosmogony is original in that it establishes the Atharvan as the pivot 
about which the creative acts revolve, and in leading up dexterously to the 
presumably main object of a Brahmana of the AV.: the exaltation of the 
functions of the Brahman-priest who is, of course, understood to be an 
Atharvavedin. 

X Cp. Brh. Ar.Up. 5. 4.,-— 2 parok^ai GB. i. I. 7 (bis\ 39; 2. 21 (bis); 3. 19; 
4. 23, and similarly AB. 3. 33. 6; 7. 30. 4; TB. i. 5. 9. 2, etc. — 3 GB. i. 1. 2o, 
29, 39; 2. 16. 23; 3. 14; 5, IS, 19. The conception reaches back to the Samhita 
itself, AV. 2. 22 and 23; see S 45 * ~ Cp. AV. 19. 22^ and 23, and see S 35 * — 
5 The same .subject is treated in an , expanded form in the second cosmogony, 
I. I. 17—19.— 6 This etymology occurs also JBU. 2. I!. 9. — 7 Cp. Bergaigne, 
III. 144; Geldner, Ved. Stud. Il" 292. — 8 Cp. IS. XIII. 433* — 9 fami as the 
vyahrii of the Ahgirasa-Veda is contrasted with ont of the Atharva^a-Veda also in 
GB. i. I. 20; 2. 24; 3. 3; 2. 2. 14; Neither KauSika nor Vaitana bring out any 
such distinction, janat being the general Atharvanic vyahrth see the indexes to the 
editions, p. 381 (Kaii^.), and p, 95 (Vait.). For the origin of janat cp. RV. 2. 21. 4; 
4. 40. 2 (cp. also 3. 61. 4). — *0 Quoted, with variants by Saya^a in the intro- 
duction to the AV., p. 5. — I* Cp. Kau 5 , 91. 10 iff. — Emend in the text, 
£amasa, adhvaryavo to cafnasddhvaryavo. — *3 Cp. Kau 5 . 9. 5 ff* The passage in 
GB. I. I. 14, tad yathd tavanena etc., is borrowed from Chand. Up. 4 * 17 * 7 J h is 
alluded to a second time in GB. i. 3. 3, 

S 68. First Prapathaka: 1. i, 16—30. The Prauiava-Upani^ad, 
being a cosmogonic account deriving creation from the oin. — In 
the Persian translation of fifty Upanisads, the so-called Otipnekhat,. which was 
made in .1656 for the Sultan Mohammed Dara Shukoh in the city ofBelhi, 
and which was afterwards (1801—2) translated by Anquetil Duperron into 
Latin, the Pranou figures as the 48*^ Upani§ad of the collection*. Weber, 
after erroneously identifying the Pranou with the Prana and PranSLgnihotra 
Upanisads (IS. I 249? 286), soon recognized its proper title to be Pranava 
(IS. II. 394, 396; III 326), and presented an account of it, condensed from 
Anquetil’s Latin translation (IS. IX. 49 ff.). Manuscripts of an independent 
Pranaya-Upani^ad are reported in the catalogues^, but have not up to date 
come into the hands of students of the Upanisads. Thus Deussen in his 
recent translation of the Upanisads (Sechzig Upanishad’s, p. 8 58 ff.) felt com- 
pelled to present the Pranou in a German translation from Anquetil’s Fersp- 
Latin version, without, as he thought, having access to the Sanskrit original 
Yet the Sanskrit text of the Pranava has unconsciously been in the hands of 




IV. The Gopatha-Brahmana. — B, Contents of the Purva-Brahmana. 109 


Indologists for more than 25 years: it is the part of the GB. here before us. 
A comparison of GB. i. i. 16 — 30 with Deussen’s translation shows that the 
differences between the two versions are unimportant: they are likely to be 
due to the blending of text and commentary in the Persian version, as well 
as to the peculiar tertiary character of Deussen’s final result. In its form as 
an independent Upani^ad the Pranava is divided into three Brahmaigias, em- 
bracing respectively sections 16 — 22; section 23; and sections 24 — 30 of 
GB. A quick survey of its contents and a comparison with GB. may be 
gotten with the help of Deussen's translation. 

This part of GB. represents obviously an independent account of 
creation by a different writer. It is probably' of later date than the first 
cosmogony, and conceived under different impulses: The Brahma (neuter) 
creates Brahma (masc.) upon a lotus-leaf. The latter by means of penance 
perceives the syllable om of two letters, four morae. With the first letter he 
perceives the waters and moisture with the second brilliancy and the 
luminaries (16). From the three vocalic morae (i. e., presumably, plutied) 
a chain of cosmic, liturgic, and psycho-physical triads (cp. i. i. 6 ) are next 
derived: earth, atmosphere, heaven; fire (with plants and trees), wind, sun; 
RV., YV., SV.; hhuTy bhuva^^ smb; gdyatrj, irisUihh, jagati] etc. (17 — 19). 
From its first consonantal mora are derived water, moon (cp. i. i. 13b 
AV., om itself (! om iti svam dtmdnam)^ janat (the vydhrti of the Angiras; 
cp. I. 2. 24), anusfubhy etc. (20). From its second consonantal mora m the 
itihdsa-purdna and other literary varieties, which differ wholly from the cor- 
responding account in the first cosmogony, i. i. 10; vrdhat and the other 
Atharvanic vydhriis (i. i. 10); musical instruments, singing, and dancing; the 
metre brhat%\ etc. (21). The second cosmogony leads up to the same climax 
as the first, the glorification of the duties of the Atharvanic Brahman-priest 
who heals with the om before and after the sacrifice all its defects (illustrated 
by AV. 10. 8. 9, and 9. 10. 18). The rather dignified chapter winds up with 
a hocus-pocus according to which om recited 1000 times grants all wishes 
(22). At this, point ends the first Brahmaj^a of the Pra^iava. The remaining 
chapters of the <?z«-cosmogony seem again secondary. In Brahma^a-manner 
a conflict of the gods and Asuras about the city (aindranagaram) of the 
Vasordharas (Anquetil^s defective Sudha) is narrated; the Asuras are victorious 
until the gods turn victors under the leadership of om^ the oldest son of 
Brahma. The reward of the om is that no holy text shall be chanted without 
om. Hence the om figures as follows: rcy rg hhavati^ yajusi yajub^ sdmni 
sdma^ Uoke siokab^ pranave pranavabi thus sayeth a Brahmaija-text. The AV. 
is omitted, pointing seemingly to the origin of the passage from a non- 
Atharvan source^ (23). At this point ends the second Brahmai^a of the 
Praigiava. The next chapters contain a grammatico-philos^iphic disquisition on 
the om which betrays its very late and independent origin by statements not 
in accord with the preceding. Thus in section 25, as frequently in the later 
AV. Upani§ads, four morae are ascribed to the om in a manner different 
from section 17. The etymology, pronunciation, and use of om are described 
with great detail, introducing a large number of technical grammatical terms^. 
In section 24 thirty-six questions about the om are posited. In section 25 Prajapati 
explains the om to Indra: it is said to have different pronunciations in the 
four Vedas {svaritoddtta in the RV., etc.). Its four morae are said to be 
respectively brahmadevatyd^visnudevatyd^ isdnadevatyd^ iarvadeuatyd (text^^zrz/^®); 
each has an individual color. In section 26 the questions asked in 24 are 
answered in detail. In defining the term avyaya the karika, Mahabhasya I, 
p. 96 (Kielhorn^s edition) is introduced. In section 28 an evil divinity Do§apati 



no 


n. Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


figures as a RisH at the beginning of. the dvdpara-B.gt (see S 66, note i). 
The chapter again leads up to the importance of the bhrgvangirovidak 
(24 — 28). This in turn furnishes the occasion for an account of the four 
Vedas and renewed exaltation of the AY. - The Vedas, their divinities fthe 
moon, as usual, the divinity of the AY.), metres, and especially their initial 
mantras are stated; as opening mantra of the AV. the pratika of 1.6. i (Jam 
no dmr abhistayi) is given A renewed mystic exaltation of the om serves 
as .the finale of the m-cosmogony (29, 30). 

^ Cp. Max Muller, SBE. vol. I, p. LViiff. — 2 gee p. 21, note^S?. — 3 Read, 
apah meham ca, for apamehas ca, witli B 5 HTLJNOK, BKSGW., February, 1896, p. i6 
of the reprint. — 4 Cp., e. g., Chtod. Up. VI. 2 ff, — 5 Though am is said in 
I. i. 16, 25 to consist of four morae, its treatment here presupposes five. The 
V seems to be a transitional consonant derived from a = av, i, e., au g v m; cp. 
Bohtlingk, 1. c. — ^ cp. however SBE, XLII, p. xxxiiiT. — 7 See B6hthngk, 

1. c., p. 17. — 8 See Kauiika, Introduction, p, xxxvnff., and above, p. 14. 

§ 69. First Prapathaka: i, i. 31 — 38, The Gayatrl-Upaiii§ad. — 
This text describes itself as an XJpam§ad, and deals with a theme .suggestive 
of the Shavank Upanisad, though it is not at all like it (cp. Deussen, 1 . c. 
p. 867). It has been translated by Rajendralala Mitra in the introduction 
to his edition of GB., p. 19 if. It begins’ with the legend of a scholastic duel 
between Maudgalya and a strange sage Glava Maitreya, apparently an adherent 
of the Sama-Veda, judging by the fact that the name Glava is mentioned 
in PB. 2 5, 15.3; SB. 1.4.6; ChandUp. 1.12, and, as far as is known, nowhere 
else. Glava is defeated because he cannot explain The sdviirJ^ the gayatr\ 
of 24 syllables and 12 (cosmic) pairs, whose eye are the bhrgva^irasa^j cxn 
which all this is founded'. Maudgalya then explains (33) Savitar and the 
saviin as consisting of 12 cosmic pairs {mit/iunam): mind and speech; Agni 
and earth, etc., winding up with the sacrifice and its fee {yajna and daksind). 
Then follows a mystic correlation of the three padas of the gdyain with three 
cosmic sets of twelve each, prthim^ rc^ agni^ etc., mitarikm^ vdyu, etc., 

each of which has the final outcome of vrata^ religious devotion (cp. varenya 
in the text of the gdyatn). With characteristic inconsistency the AV. itself is 
ignored in this apportionment of the gdyain^ though it has been assumed 
that the bhrgvangirasa^ are its. eye. The subject ends with the statement, 
iriyam asnute ya evam etdni vedanatti mdtaram sdvitnsampadam upanisadam 
upasta iti brdhmanam. 

S First Prapathaka: i. i. 39. The acamaha-rite. — The first 
prapathaka ends with a chapter on the dcamana, being the Brahmana-comment 
to Vait. I, 19; Kaus. 3. 4; 90. 22. The opening pratika, dpo garbham jam- 
yanttk^ seems to refer to an independent (PaippalMa?) version of AV.4.2.S 
{apo mtsam janayantify); other mantras (AV. 19. 69 and 70), formulas, and 
siokas are also cited. The main prescript is, that the dcamana, the act of 
rinsing the mouth, shall take place three times; the Atharvan school-character 
of the chapter appears in the identification of the three dcamanas with 
the purastdddhoma^ djyabhdgau^ and samsthitahomd^ (Kaui 3. 19; Vait 
1.4, etc.). Finally the Bhrgvangirasah are correlated with the waters by 
means of a slbka similar to the prose-statement in i. i. 29. The chapter 
is an independent, though late, Atharvanic lucubration: it may possibly 
have been suggested by the expression, dpo jyotisi pratistMtdh, in the pre- 
ceding section, 

S 71. Second Prapathaka: 1.2.1— 9. The duties of the Brahraa- 
carin. — The theme may have been suggested by the preceding treatis^e on 
sdvitri, whose acquisition is an important part of the training of the 



IV. The Gopatha-Brahmana. — B, Contents of the Purva-Brahmana. hi 

Brahman disciple. The treatment is based upon AV.11. 5, a hymn glorifying 
the sun as a Brahman disciple^; it is carried out^ with considerable originality, 
differing markedly from the presentations in SB. ii. 5. 4; TA. 2, and the 
Grhyasfitras. The Brahmacarin is urged to overcome the seven passions: 
cast(»-pride {brahmavarcasam), fame, sleep, anger, bragging, personal beauty, 
and fragrance, which are correlated respectively with the antelope, the teacher, 
the boa, the boar, watery maidens, trees and plants. If he clothes himself 
in the skin of the antelope he obtains brakmavarcasani\ if he .works for his 
teacher he obtains the latter’s fame; if, though sleepy, he abstains from sleep 
he obtains the sleep that is in the boa; if, humble in spirit, he does not injure 
any one through anger he obtains the anger that is in the boar; if he does 
not perform braggart tricks in the water he obtains the braggadocio that is 
in the water; if he does not look at a naked maiden he obtains the beauty 
that is in the maiden; if he does not smell at plants and trees, after having 
cut them, he becomes himself fragrant (i, 2). The next four sections .continue 
the duties and rewards of the Brahmacarin with allegories and illustrative 
legends (3 — 6). The next chapter contains mantras in expiation of certain 
sins to which he is liable: two of them occur Vait. 12. 7 — 9 (ApS.9. 13. ii), 
but a third {yadzdam rtzikdmya etc.) seems original with the GB. The' 
Brahmacarin is next described as devmdm parisutam^ Hhat which has been 
set in motion by the gods’ (the sun), referring to AV. 11.5. 23 in its Paippalada- 
version^ (7). In chapter the Brahmacarin is urged to betake himself to 
a hermitage, after the pattern of the great sages of yore. The son of the 
great Eishi Vasi§tha recited the hemistich AV. ii. 5. 25^^ (ii. 5. 24^^ in 
the vulgata) into the mouth of a shell, in order that a cold and a hot 
spring should issue therefrom. Then in the middle of the river Vipas 
there arose the first hermitage Vasi§thasila by name. This was followed 
by others: the names of the hermitages are for the most part original. 
After an account of an extraordinary feat of asceticism it is said that 
Siva performed tapas during 48000 brdhniya years upon the back of the 
ocean {salilasya prsthe). The chapter is Pauranic rather than Brahmana. 
Lastly, in chapter 9, as at the end of each of the preceding broader 
themes the text again finds its way to a statement of the preeminence 
of the AV. and the Brahman-priest (bhrgvangiras). After explaining the 
brahm^dya-^lmzz. AV. 13. 2. 27, the functions of the four Vedas and their 
priests are discussed and illustrated by mantras from the AV. and elsewhere, 
one stanza {antarikse pathibhir etc.) being BV. 10. 168. 3 with original 
variants. 

S 72. Second Prapafhaka concluded. Various subjects: i. 2. 
10—14. Disquisition on the sacrifice and the sacrificial place 
{dev ay aj ana), — A hungry priest, Vicarin the son of Kabandha Atharvana 
(cp. 1.2. 18), too proud to seek subsistence, is sent out by his equally hungry 
mother. Having gone to a soma-sacrifice at the court of the emperor Man- 
dhatar Yauvanasva he proceeds at once to give instruction in marked Upani§ad- 
style on the sacrifice and the choice of a sacrificial place: ‘As all rivers 
having proper names lose their identity in the ocean, thus do all the Vedas 
and subsidiary literary categories lose their individual character in the sacri- 
fice.’ After a description of the ritualistic properties of the devayajana the 
relative position and functions of the four priests loom up once more: the 
Brahman-priest is, of course, the mind of the sacrifice (cp. i. 3, 2, 14). The 
subject is disposed of with a final definition of the devayajana under four 
heads, ^ dtmd^ sraddM, rtvijajp^ and bhaumam^ exhibiting points of contact 
with SB. 3, I. I. 



1 1 2 n. Literature and History, i b. Atharva-V ed a and Gopath a-BrAhmana. 


I. 2. 15 — 17. The brahmati'dana at the agnyadheya. — Here the 
GB. begins to address itself more directly to the task of acting as a Brahmana 
to the Vait(5.4;, cp. 6.6). Not, as might be expected, is this subject treated 
here in relation to the conspicuous brahmaudana-hymn^ AV. ii.i and 12.3, 
but with the superficial purpose of correlating the cdtubpraiya odana (porridge 
sufficient for four priests) with the Atharvanic Vedic tetrad, the string upon 
which the Brahmana harps in. and out of season. After reciting the familiar 
legend of Aditi who begot the Adityas by eating the leavings of the 
brahmaudana^^ the cdtubprdiya is correlated with the stereotyped cosmic 
and liturgic tetrads: the AV. comes in for the'' tetrad, dpabi candramd^^ 
brakmmeda^ and brahmatva (function of the Brahman-priest). This is 
supported by liturgic explanations of the mantra catz^dri irngas etc. (RV. 
4.58.3, etal.)^, and AV. 10. 10. 2. This is followed by the recommendation, 
rather, striking in an extreme partisan text, that the first fee at the 
sacrifice be given to an Atreya priest, descended from the Atri-stock, for 
the well-known reason that Atri freed the sun from darkness. The passage 
rubricates AV. 13. 2. 4^*^, 12, and seems to illustrate Vait. 21. 25 (cp. SB. 
4.3.4.21). 

I. 2. 18— -21. The iron-shod horse at the agnyadheya. — This 
horse, one of the main requirements of the agnyddh^h (Vait 5. ii; SB. 2. i. 
4. 16), is produced by Vac from, frightful, gruesome waters. The three Vedas 
fail to pacify the’ horsey then Sarpyu Atharva^a, the /^«/z-principle of the 
AV. 7 , engages Vicarin, the son of Kabandha Atharva^a (cp. i. 2. 10), who 
prepares the ^holy water’ {santyudakd) by means of ‘holy’ (atharvand) and 
‘witchcraft’ {dn^iram) plants, and by the recitation of the appropriate lists of 
mantras® (18). The account of the horse is interrupted by an Atharvanic 
legend concerned with the origin and nature of the Brahman-priest and his 
assistants (cp. Vait ii. 3): the latter are stated to be Sadasya, BrahmauSc- 
chamsin, Potar, and A^Idhfa^ (19), xhe text returns to the ‘fire-footed’ 
horse, explaining why it is called Agni Vaisvanara in the mantra, agnitn 
ivdkur vaiivdnamm (Vait 6. 7; GB. i. 2. 21), and to differentiate it from 
Agni Jatavedas, the fire at the agnyddhdna itself. The Bralima^a (i. e. the 
Brahmanic religion) carried Agni Vaisvanara; the latter created these worlds 
Then Agni Jatavedas in rivalry determines to exhibit his brilliancy and force, 
so that the Brahmana should carry him also. Jatavedas exhibits his virtues 
in four different ways;, the last time ‘he saw Viraj, the wife of the Brahmana’, 
and gave her to him. Then the Brahmana built Agni Jatavedas; Agni 
Vaisvanara, on the other hand, became the horse which frightened the gods, 
and Brahman (the Brahman-priest) calmed it with the above-mentioned stanza, 
and with the five stanzas, Vait. 6. i. Next, aneiit Vait 6. 8, the chariot (ratka) 
is mounted.' It originated from the sap (rasa) of the Brahman, went to the 
gods, frightened them, but sundry stanzas appeased it also. Finally reasons 
are given why cows and gold are presented to the Brahmans at the cdilu^- 
praiya (Vait 6, 6). 

I. 2* 22—23, The saiptapana-fire. — From the time of RV, -7. 59. 9 
die term sdmtapana is associated with the Maruts, being ritualistically tinted 
from the start. As in Vait 9, 2 the term appears everywhere in connectioB 
with the Maruts at the sdkamedha-ctxtmom^ (one of the seasonal sacrifices, 
cd^rmdsydm)'^^. Here, however, it appears as the name of a fire connected 
with brahma^ the hrdhmafta^ and the brdhmyaifi havis. Especially in the 
Gihya-ceremonies (samskdras) the BrahmauR i^thout the sdftdapana suggests 
to the writer a clod in. a pot that does not shine. It would seem as though 
the single, fire of the house-practic^, in which a single Brahmana is engaged, 



IV. The Gopatha-Brahmana. — B. Contents of the Purva-Brahmana. 113 


were here called samtapana. The subject-matter itself, and the reason for its 
presence here are far from clear. 

I. 2. 24 — I. 3.5. Preeminence of the Atharvanic Brahman-priest. — 
The text returns to its pet theme, the Atharvanic Brahman (cp. Vait fi. 2). 
An inane legend introduces the cosmic and liturgic tetrads (cp. i. 2. 16), 
designed to shelter the fourth Veda, which figures in the series with atharv- 
dngirah^ hrahmatva^ dpaJi^ candraniafp^ , * . om ity atharvandm sukram, janad 
ity angirasdm (cp, i. i. 20, and above, p. 8). 

I SBE. XLII, p. 214, 626 ff. — 2 Read, krodho 'pak sldgkaniy for, krodkofiasldgham^ 
in the text, p. 23, last line. — 3 See Roth, AV. in Kaschmir, p. 23. — 4 Marked 
7 in the edition: the false numbering continues to 14; after that correctly 15? etc. 
— S Cp. TS, 6. 5. 6. I; MS. 2. i. 12; TB. i. i. 9. I. — 6 This liturgic explanation 
of the mantra is parallel to, yet different from that presented by the scholiasts at 
VS. 17. 91;- TA. 10. 10. 2j Nir. 13. 7. Roth, AV. in Kaschmir, p. 23, points out 
that the writing caivari srngas (GB., p. 34, 1. 3) is that of the AVP. Three lines 
below, however,* and at the end of GB. 2. 2. 6, we have the pratika in thfe form, 
caivari srngetL — 7 See p. 8, and SBE. XLII, p. xxi. — 8 Kau^. 9; Vait. 5. I off.; 
see JAOS. XI. 387 ff. ; SBE. XLII, p. XVIIL. — 9 Later, in passages that betray 
their origin from ritual-texts of the RV., the Brahmanacchamsin, with Maitravaruria 
and Achavaka, figures as one of the assistants of the Hotar: e. g. 2. 4. 14. — 
Cp. I. 4. I. 10 ff. — II Weber, IS. X. 340; Hillebrandt, Ritual-Litteratur, 
p. U7. 

S 73. Third Prapafhaka. Various subjects: 1.3. i — 5. Preeminence 
of the Atharvanic Brahman-priest (continued). — In i. 3. i they that 
know the bkrgvangirasa^ are called devd brahmandh] without them the sacri- 
fice limps like a quadruped deprived of its allowance of four feet Section 1.3. 2 
continues with an Atharvanic redaction of AB. 5. 32. 3ff., with this conspicuous 
difference that the AB. says, atha ke 7 ia brahmatvam kriyata iti: trayyd vidyaya; 
but the GB. ascribes the brahmatvam to the Atharvan. This is followed in 
1.3.3 by expiatory rules when priests break their silence at certain sacrifices. 
This is again an Atharvanic mouthing over of AB. 5. 32. 5 — 33. 4, with the 
difference that the GB. places om in front and janat after the expiatory 
formulas bhur^ etc.: obviously represents the atharvdnab^janaf Hoq ahgirasab 
(cp. i.i..20j 2.24); the other formulas are, as it were, sandwiched in between 
these* In i. 3. 4 the chief services for which the priests receive their fees 
are recounted after the pattern of AB. 5. 34. iff.; those of the Brahman-priest 
{devayajanam me ^ctklpad etc.) are of interest. This is followed (1. 3. 5) by 
an inconsequential legend showing how in a sacrifice undertaken with only 
three priests the fees were reduced by one half. 

1.3.6 — 10. Mystic explanation of the new-moon and full-moon 
sacrifice. — This is an expanded treatment of SB. ii. 4. i, giving the im- 
pression of direct dependence upon that text. Uddaiaka Aruni, the son of 
Gotama, from the country of the Kurupancalas, is chosen by his people to 
go to the Northerners where he engages in a brahmodya-conXt^t 

with Svaidayana Saunaka, the prize being a necklace. The separate acts of 
the dardapUrnamdsa are correlated with facts and events in the development 
of the human body: Hair grows first on the head, later comes the beard and 
hair on the body; it tons grey first on the head, finally all over the body. 
Creature's are born toothless, the teeth coming later; they fall out in the 
seventh or eighth year, grow again, doomed all to fall out in the end. The 
lower teeth appear first, the upper later on; the lower are narrower and 
weaker, the upper broader and stronger; etc. The physiological review ends, 
kasmdd idam iiinam uccada e£ mapadyate kasmat sakrd (? sakrd) apdnam (7). 
A specimen of the correlation of these facts with the practices at the darsa- 
purmmdsa is as follows: Because the sacrificial straw iparhis) is first spread 

Indo-AxyauD Research* XL 1 s. S 




1 14 II. Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 

in front of the altar (vedt), therefore these (human) creatures are bom first 
with hair on their heads, etc. (9). Cp. Vait 2 and 3. 

I. 3. II — 16. Mystic explanations of acts at the agnihotra.- — In 
continuance of the preceding legend another Brahman, Pracmayogya by name, 
questions Uddalaka Aruni as to the mystic meaning of the acts of the agni- 
Aotra, The passage corresponds to SB. ii. 5.3.1 — 7^, but the theme 
is handled independently and in close relation to the description Vait. 7, 
sharing with it some words elsewhere unknown^. This is followed (13, 14) by 
prayakittas for accidents that may befall the three Srauta-fires, a theme foreign 
to the published text of Vai't., but possibly dealt within its unpublished prdyak 
ato'chapters 3 . SB. ii. 5. 3. 8ff. has a closely parallel, yet independent 
treatment: the expiatory formulas differ in the two texts. The advantage of these 
expiations is illustrated in a chain of causation, introducing the familiar cosmic 
series of the four Vedas (manas^ candramds, dpas for AV.; cp. i. 2. 12, 16, 
etc.). Returning to the agnihotm, a legend is told concerning the family of 
Priyamedha Bharadvaja who thought themselves Veda-wise, ‘knew it alP, and 
did not consult any one skilled in the Vedas: they offered the agnihotra 
either once, twice, or thrice a day. They that offered it twice prospered 
most^ (15). The next chapter contains a fanciful account of the nature and 
origin of svdhd\ it is said to belong to the family of the Lamagayanas, a name 
familiar in the Saman-schools: possibly the subject is derived from a text of 
that Veda. 

I. 3. 17 — 23. Notes on the agni^toma, especially on the con- 
secration of the sacrificer (diksaj. — Abruptly the texts translates itself 
to the agnisjoma, in a legend about the priestly family of the Karus who, 
because they were poor, performed that sacrifice with one cow (the so-called 
ekagu). The passage is a note on Vait. 24. 20. The kdravo Ipasvd^^ ‘the 
poor clerics’, typify the Brahmans in general who are thus excused from too 
great personal sacrifices (17). This is followed by an account of the savamya-^ 
animal at the agnistoma, suggested by Vait. 2 2, 21, but evidently derived from 
the closely similar account, AB. 7, i. i = AS. 12. 9. Atharvanic traits are 
entirely wanting (18). Next the diksd is treated in close correspondence with 
Vait II. 17. It 'begins with an explanation of the word diksita {dhiyam 
ksiyati^)^ states the reasons why a diksita may not rise and greet any one 
(Vait. II. 18); explains the terras vicaksanavati vac and canasitavatl vdc^} 
states why the food of the diksita must not be eaten, nor his name pronounced ; 
and how conflicting ^f^^-ceremonies on the part of others are to be avoided 7 (i 9). 
This is followed by a legend in which points connected with the diksd are 
discussed (20). Next come the rules of conduct for the diksita^ coinciding 
towards the end almost literally with Vait ii. 21 — 26 (21), Then comes a 
prdyakitta for transgressions of the rules of diksd (Vait 12. i): the mantras 
are stated in full here as well as in Vait^ (22). Lastly come the practices 
of diksita when his wife is pregnant (Vait 12. 14), The description of 
the diksd makes the impression of being a secondary amplification of the 
statements of the Vait, rather than the product of independent school-tradition, 
parallel to that embodied in the Sutra. 

^ Cp, also AB, 5. 26. 6; TB. 2. i. 7. i; JB. I. 21. — 2 gamldd *cow that 
yields the milk for the a^nihatra! (Vait. 7, 2); samudvmia * boiling over’ 
(Vait. 7. 3}; adbkili pratyam ‘to add water’ (Vait . 7 -* 3 )* The word piifyupmnta 
is also Atharvanic (Kaus. 87. 26; Vait 7. 15). 3 See SBE. XLII, p. LXXl, 

note I, and above, p. i6. — 4 See SB. 2. 3. i. 18 ff.; KB. 2. 9 (end). — 5 Cp. 
the explanation oU (Tiksita as dhtksUa ^ in SB. 3. 2- 2. 30, — 6 Cp. also GB. 2. 
2. 23; AB. I. 6. Sff; K^. 7. 5. 7j ApA lo. 12. 7.-7 GB. 2. 2. li, 15, 24. Cp. 
samsofva^ AB. I. 3. 21; vi sprdh^ Vait 16. 6 1 17. 7: see Garbe’s note on Vait 



IV. The Gopatha-Brahmana. — B. Contents of the Purva-Beahmana. 115 


16. 6. — 8 The majority of the mss. at Vait. present' them in an abbreviated 
{galita) form. 

§ 74. Fourth Prapathaka. Mystic-theosophic exposition of the 
sattra of the year. — The dependence of this long and elaborate theme of 
GB. upon book 12 of SB. has been stated above, § 66. It extends through 
the fourth and fifth prapathakas, with the exception of the last three sections 
(23 — 25) of the fifth. The first 6 sections — SB. 12. i.i, deal with t\iQ diksd 
of the 16 Srauta-priests — the the sadasya, is not mentioned (cp. Vait 
31. I and II. 3). This is followed (7, 8) by a mythical derivation of the 
various istis and other acts of the agnistoma from the divinities supposed to 
correspond to them, and an account of the rewards attending these ceremonies; 
the agnistoma figures here as one of the main features of, the visuvaf- 6 zY of 
the sattra of the year^ as well as many other days: see SB. 12. i. 2. i and 
12. I. 3. I — 7, and cp. Vait ii — 17. The next two sections (9, 10) derive 
the separate parts and ceremonies of the normal sattra^ the gavamayana, from 
gods and divine personifications, with attendant rewards: see SB. 12. i. 2. 2, 3 
and 12. 1.3.8 — 22, and cp. Vait 31. 7ff. Next, two sections (ii, 12) correlate 
the sattra and certain of its parts with the year: see SB. 12. 2. 3. i. Then 
five sections (13 — 17) discuss the parts of the sattra from the point of view 
of the mahdvrata-Adys^ : see SB. 12. i. 3. 23 and, 12. 2. 3. 2 — 4, 8. The 
discussion winds up with an expanded statement of SB. 12.2.3.4; the position 
of the abhiplava in the sattra between two prsjliya is correlated with certain 
facts of ordinary life. Two sections (18, 19), essentially the same as SB. 12. 
3. 3. 6, 7, compare the sattra-y^^x with the wings of a great eagle, the vimvat- 
day in the middle being, as it were, the body of the eagle. Next (20 = SB. 
12. 2. 2. i) the character of the jyotih {jyotisjomd)^ as part of the abhiplava 
is discussed. Then follow two sections (21, 22 = SB. 12. 2. 3. 10, ii) with an 
account of the ascending and descending scale of the festival-divisions of the 
sattra-jea.T, the msumt-dsLj in the middle the second part of this account is 
then (23) supported by a legend of the contest , between the Adityas and 
Angiras'^ which is worked up rather differently in SB. 12. 2. 2. 9 — -12. This 
is dangerous ground for the GB. to venture upon, since the legends of the 
struggles between the Adityas and Aiigiras regularly exhibit the latter in the 
position of vanquished victims, similar to the Asuras in their struggles with 
the Devas; that, of course, is contrary to the spirit of the GB. where the 
Angiras are especially revered. The mere appearance of such a legend in 
this text betrays its secondary origin; but for the fact that it does not in this 
instance present the Angiras in too pronounced a position of disadvantage, 
it would be intolerable here. The prapathaka is concluded (24 == SB. 12. 2; 
2, 13 — 23) with a theological discourse (brahmodya) between Predi (SB. Proti) 
Kau^ambeya Kausuravindu and his teacher Uddalaka Aruni in which the 
sacrifice, the year, as the single one {ekam), is said to consist of respectively 
ten, nine, eight, etc. days {ahdni). Very neat is the turn given by the ^ GB. 
to the relation of the year with the number four. Whereas the SB. establishes 
this relation through the four-footed cattle, the GB. does not neglect to clinch 
its oft-repeated assertion that the Veda is fourfold: cafvdra vat vedd vedair 
yajnas tdyate. It is not possible to doubt that GB. presents the secondary 
version of the two. 

I Vait 31. lo; kA 13.2.7, — 2 See Hillebrandt, Ritual-^tteratur, p. l 57 - — 
3 Weber, Naksatra, II. 282, note; Hillebrandt, I. c.j cp, Vait 31. 14* — 4 Cp. 
Weber, IS- I. "291 ff.; Episcbes im vedischea Ritual, p. 46. 

S 75. Fifth Prapathaka: i. 5. i — 22. Exposition of the sattra of 

the year concluded. — The first section « SB. 12. 2. 2. 12, deals with the 

' 



1 1 6 II. Literature and History, i b. Atharva-V eda and Gopatha-Brahman a. 


abhiplava^ normally of six days, in mystic, variations whicli enable it to em- 
brace from five days to one. Next (2 = SB. 12.2.1,1 — 9) comes a phase of 
the sattra called gddhapratisthdj and then three sections in which the sattra 
and its parts are correlated with the cosmic man ( purusa) and his members 
(3 ~ SB. 12. I. 4. iff.; 4 « SB. 12. 2. 4. I ff.; 5 = SB. 12. 3. 2. i ff). In 
these sections the GB. exhibits a good deal of independence; especially the 
two slokas in section 5 differ considerably from those in SB. 12. 3. 2. 6, 7: 
they occur nowhere else in the published literature. Then (6 = SB. 12.3. 

5. 12 — 13) comes a statement of the identical grouping and numerical relation 
of the main events of the two sattra half-years on either side of the visuvat- 
day, which differs from those made in Yait 31. 15; GB. i. 5. 23. 

At this point (7) the text introduces z. yajnakrama stating the so-called 
haviryajna or and the soma-sacrifices {somasamsihdJj). It coincides with 
the order followed in theVait. only up to the first of the soma-festivals, the 
agnistoma^. Nor does this yajnakrama, or that exhibited practically in Vait, 
coincide with that stated farther on, GB. 1.5. 23. The latter coincides almost 
perfectly with the classical yajnakrama^ as reported on the authority of 
Gautama’s Dharmasutra. 8. 19, 20^; the present account is more or less 
independent of all other known statements. This yajnakrama is merely a 
stepping-stone to the glorification of the sakasradaksim-ssLcrifice (8). Prajapati 
performs ail ceremonies in the order of the yajnakrama^ obtaining only 
perishable results (antam), but when he follows up a sattra with the sahasra- 
daksina he obtains imperishable results. The two sections bear every mark, 
of secondary construction in behalf of Vait. 34. 21. 

In renewed touch with SB., section 9 of GB. «= SB. 12. 3. $. 3 — 11 
advises those that are devoting themselves to the sattra {safnvatsarasaffisadaJj) 
to keep intact the other sacrifices, agnihotra^ etc., which ordinarily would 
claim their- attention. Next (10 = SB. 12. 3. 3. iff.) there is a legend, in 
illustration of Vait. 42. 18, about the impossible sattra of a 1000 years 3 , for 
which the vUvajit is substituted: the GB. characteristically substitutes five Vedas 
(m, yajusij sdmni^ sdnte = atharvani, and ghore «= afigirasi) for the three 
Vedas, SB. 12. 3. 3, 2^. Sections n- — 20 expand considerably the subject of 
the three daily savanas, as treated in SB. 12. 3. 4. iff. The GB. manages to 
import a good many Atharvan traits: in ii, a propos of vidvamsaJ^^ the fourth 
(Brahman) priest is described in almost the same words as Kaus. 9^4. 3, 4. 
The four formulas, mayi bharga^ ... mayi sarvam, are correlated in SB. 12. 
3. 4, 6 — 9 with three cosmic-liturgic forms, including the trayi vidyd and an 
indefinite fourth corresponding to sarvam^ namely, ye anye lokds (da'ds, vedds, 
pranas) tat sarvam; the GB. changes this into a definite tetrad, so as to 
provide amply for an Atharvanic cosmos {dpaby candramdJ}^ etc.) in relation 
to the formula mayi sarvam {sarvavidyd *= brahmaveda)\ see sections 15 
and 19. Very noteworthy is the original version of the three formulas at the 
three savanas (12 — 14)^ : the passage GB. ii — 2,0 offers perhaps the most, 
conspicuous instance of the manner in which this text, though removed by 
an almost immeasurable distance from the original springs of Srauta-tradition, 
yet manages to adapt existing materials to its all-absorbing purpose, the 
glorificMion of the Atharvan. At this point (21) a legend introducing Dadhyanc 
Angirasa, not found in SB., correlates the formulas, am srdvaya^ etc., containing 
17 syllables, with the year, or Prajapati, or the sacrifice^, and then leads up 
to pravara^ the invitation of the manes, Vait. 2. 15; the very words of 
that text as also the citation^ (AV. 6. 123. 3—5) are repeated in GB. The 
subject is concluded (22 «=* SB. 12. 3. 5. ii) with the sdvitrapaiu (cp. Vait. 
22. 10). 



IV. The Gopatha-Brahmana. — C. Contents of the Uttara-Brahmana. i 17 


$ 76. Fifth Prapathaka: i. 5. 23 — 25. Metrical treatise on the 
sacrifice, — The last three sections of the Purva-Brahmana lack a certain 
unity of structure, which makes it possible to imagine that they are not from 
the same hand. First (23) there is the oi6m2ixy its account of 

the haviryajna and somasa7nsthit^ {sutyal}) coincides with Gaut Dh. 8. 19, 20: 
the pdkayajna accord with the wording and order of Satyavrata Samasrami 
in the Hindu Journal Uslia^. The apparent derivation here of thQ yq/na/erama 
from schools of the SV; may lend significance to the presence in this section 
of slokas that are paralleled by the JaiminTya-Brahma^a, also a Saman-text 
The rest of the section consists of questions and answers iprahmodya) devoted 
to the time-divisions of the sacrificial year. One of the stanzas is identical 
with Vait 31. 15. Another (p. 85, 1 . 17) occurs in a variant form in Jaim. 
Br. 2. 73®; yet another stanza, Jaim. Br. 2.. 71 exhibits a certain relationship 
with that beginning GB., p. 85, 1 . 13. The next section (24) contains a 
cosmogonic Atharvanic account of the origin of the sacrifice. Vaisvanara 
heated with tapas^ desiring offspring, pours semen into Sraddha. From this 
union the world-conquering soma-toothed Angiras is born. Then the resulting 
four Vedas are described: ‘The holy Atharvan and, Angiras praise with 
prayakittas and bhesajas\ Next follows a list of the 17 Srauta-priests, divided 
into four Vedic groups to which are added four other functionaries, the 
wife at the sacrifice {diksim patm\ the butcher (samitar)^ the householder 
(grbapatf), and lastly Angiras himself. The last section (24) is the final 
apotheosis of the Atharvan. After stating that all the 21 orthodox sacrifices, 
both of the present and of yore, resolve themselves in the Angiras, the text 
enters once more upon an elaborate cosmic tetrad in behalf of the AV., similar 
to, yet somewhat different from* the preceding ones*^ The final outcome of the 
cosmogony is the sacrifice protected {gupta'^^) by the Atharvan. In addition 
to the regular sacrifice the formulas and offerings of the village and forest 
also resolve themselves in the Angiras; and, finally, the Atharvan secures the 
heaven of Brahma, whereas the trayJ vidyd can only procure the trivistapam 
iridivam ndkam uttamam. . 

I See Garbe, Vaitana-Sstra, Translation, p. iv. — 2 Weber, IS. X. 326; Max 
Muller, ZDMG., IX, p. Lxxm; SBE. XXX. 357 ff; Hillebrandt, ibid. p. 41. — 
3 Weber, IS. XIIL 335; Hillebrandt, ibid. p. 158.— 4 See above, p. 8. — 5 See 
above, $66, end. — ^ Cp. GB. i. 3. 10; 5. lo; SB. 12. 3. 3* 3- “ 7 Max M 0 LLER, 
SBE. XXX. 358; cp. above p. 116. The somasamstkdh coincide also with' AS^6, ii. i ; 
KS. 10. 9. 28. — ^ To wit: ayuiam ekam prayuimi ^asiir, niyute dve nava cakmranh 
sapia sahasrani dasato dasa, eidvan dtmd paramah prafdpaieh. — 9 asiav eta navataya 
bhavaniy, ahorairdnam parivatsarasya, asliir asmin savanani irJm ca, sahasram ca 
pavamdndi ca sarve. — 10 The SV. is alluded to with the probably late expression 
sdmagho§a ‘noise of the Saman^ as in the Grhya and Dharma-texts. — The 
sadasya is included this time among the Atharvanas; cp. GB. 1.4*^ — 6 ; Vait. 1 1. 3. 
— x2 E. g. in I. 5. 15 and 19. ~ *3 Cp. the goptdrah, GB. I. i. 13.— it Cp. the 
grdniaydjaka, etc., SBE. XLII, p. XL, note. 

C. CONTENTS OF THE UTfARA-BRAHMANA (THE YAJNAKRAMA'). 

S 77. First Prapathaka: 2. i. 1--12. The new and full-moon 
offerings.— -The first section deals with three points: the purification of the 
Brahman’s seat; the fetching of the and the placing of the 

pandki-^txclB around the fire. The first two themes are borrowed literally 
from KB. 6. 13, except for two characteristic touches. The formula, idam 
ahani arvdvdsoh etc., appears in its Atharvanic form, idctM ahuM arvugvctsop^ 
etc. (Kaus. 3. 7; 137. 39); and for, brhaspaiir ha vai dci^mam brahma^ in 
KB., the GB. reads, brhaspatir vd dhgiraso^ unto the greater glory of the 



1 1 8 IL Literature and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 

Angirasa-Veda. The statement about the pranJtd-waXti^ Vait 2. 2, coincides 
with both GB. and KB., whereas that which concerns the paridhis (Vait 2. 
8, 13) does not appear in KB., but seems to be original with GB. The next 
three sections (2 — 4) deal with the ^rdsitra-ioo^^ Vait 3. 7 beginning with 
the prasitraAtgtvid.\ Rudra being * refused a share of the sacrifice cut off a 
portion of it, the prdiiira. This is given successively to Bhaga v/hom it 
makes blind; to Savitar whom it makes handless (and subsequently golden- 
handed); to Fusan whom it makes a toothless eater of gruel; to Idhma’ 
Ahgirasa who loses by it his head ; to Varhi (Barhi) Ahgirasa whose body is 
disjointed by it; finally to Brhaspati Angirasa (the typical Brahman-priest) 
who recites mantras over it that render it harmless Idhma Angirasa echoes 
the well-known legend of Dadhyanc Atharvajja or Angirasa^. Neither Idhma 
nor Barhi are mentioned elsewhere, being clap-trap personifications; the three 
Angirasas who figure here indicate the working over of the legend into an 
Atharvanic mould. The last half of section 3 corresponds closely to KB. 
6. 14; section 4 to TS. 2.6.9. Nexh individual points of the dardapurnanidsa 
are treated: the prohibition of the dakdnd, because the amd/iarya-^orxidgt 
is the ordained fee at' these sacrifices 5 (5); the next section (6), a propos 
of the anvdhdrya^ is borrowed almost literally from MS, 1.4. 6 (p. 54, 1 . 3 ffi); 
then (7) the anvdkarya is described as Prajapati’s share, the point being 
illustrated by the legend of the gods’ sacrifice to Frajapati, whereas the Asuras 
sacrificed into one another’s mouths^. The need of performing the daria- 
purnamdsa before entering upon the soma-sacrifice is urged in section 8; an 
expiatory act on the rise of ‘the moon when the priest is about to cook for 
the evening-offering is the theme of section 9 7 ; the mystic description of the 
pUrvd and utiard paurnamdsl and amavdsya is copied literally from Kaul 

1. 29, 30, and defined further in section 10. The rule that only one of the 
two full-mood and new-moon days shall be chosen (ii) is copied almost 
verbatim, with shocking blunders on the part of the edited text, from TS. 

2. 5. 5. 2ff. Finally (12) certain oblations to Agni-Visnu, and to Sarasvatl 
and Sarasvant, preparatory to the darsapurnamasa^ are described in accordance 
with V’"ait. 8. i, 2®, 

2. I. 13 — 16. Kamyestayah. — The next three sections (13 — 15) deal 
with sacrifices for the fulfilment of special wishes. The Vait. has nothing to 
correspond; they are, indeed, an almost verbatim copy of MS. 2. i. 10 V 
Section 16 is the Brahmana of Vait ii. i (beginning of the agnistomd)^ in 
verbal agreement with GB.: he that wishes to perform a soma-sacrifice shall 
offer a freed steer (mram anusrstanC) to Indra-Agni, in case his father and 
grandfather had not made a soma-sacrifice in their life-time. Since the theme 
is treated out of order it was perhaps conceived as a kdmyesji, 

2. I. 17 — 26. Agrayaiia; agnicayana; and caturmasyanL — ^ The 
offering of the first fruits of the season (17) begins with the usual legend ex- 
plaining the libations to Agni-Indra,, the Visve Devah, and Soma^®; otherwise 
the treatment corresponds closely to Vait. 8. 3 — 7. Judging from the mention, 
at the end, of the Atharvanic purastaddkoma and samsthitahoma (Kaii&3. 10; 
Vait I. 4, etc.) this seems to be a somewhat original Brahmana. In section 
18 the text, apparently without reason, undertakes a salto mortale into the 
agnicayana-ctxtmoxxj, describing the use of the apratirathd'^hyxm in its Atharvan 
version (AV. 19, 13) at that ceremony. The Brahmau^- illustrates Vait 29. 16, 
and is almost identical with MS. 3. 3. 7 (p. 40, L 2ff.); cp. also SB. 9. 2. 3. 
1—5. The irregularity is the more marked because the next sections deal 
with the cdturmdsydni which in Vait 8 follow immediately upon the dgrd- 
yam. The remaining sections of this prapathaka (19 — 26) deal with the 



IV. Thbt Gopatha-Brahmana. — C. Contents of- the Uti'ara-Brahmana. 119 


seasonal offerings; they are, as has been shown above (p. 102), taken from 
KB., and call for no further comment. 

^ See above p. ii6. — 2 cp. KB. 6, 13, 14; SB, l. 7. 4. 5ff. ; TS. 2. 6. 8; 

Rajendralala Mitra, Introd. p. 29 ff. — 3 Cp. especially, TS^ 2. 6, 8. 5 ff. — 

4 Weber, IS. 1. 290, 384. — 5 Vait. 3. 19; cp. TS. i . 7. 3. 3; SB. i. 2. 3. 5. — 

6 Vait 3. 20; cp. TS. 1. 7.^ 3. 4. — 7 Very similar to TS. 2. 5. 5. i ff. ; cp. KB. 

4. 2. ~ 8 Cp. AB. I. 1; SB. 3. 1. 3. I, — ^9 Cp. TS. 2. 2. 2. i; KB. 4. 3. — 
Cp. SB. 2. 4. 3 * 

§ 78. Second Prapithaka: 2. 2. i — 4, The tanunaptra-ceremony 
of the agnistoma. — The first section opens in a rather perplexing manner 
with certain kdmyestls in which quadrupeds and birds are sacrificed by him 
that has built the holy fire {dhitdgni) in order to gain some special wish’^. 
It interrupts the yajnakraina of Vait, which in chapter 10 deals with the 
pasuhandha, unless the GB. regards this as a note on that very ceremony. 
Then (2 — 4) the text turns to the tanmaptra^ beginning with the legend in 
TS. 6. 2. 2. I almost verbatim ^ Then comes the ceremony proper, again in 
close touch with TS., but with an Athairvanic improvement or two ; e. g,, the 
GB. substitutes manas (representing the Brahman-priest) for prana in TS. 
The numerous mantras, however, accord in the main with Vait. (13. i6ff.) 
rather than TS.8 Apparently the GB. embellishes the acts of the Sutra with 
the Brahmaria of TS., without drawing upon independent tradition. 

2. 2. 5 — 6. The pravargya-ceremony. — Section 5 again interrupts the 
yafnakrama of Vait. by one of those disquisitions on defects in the sacrifice 
which lead up to the glorification of the hhrgvangirovid\ it may have been 
thought suitable here because of the yaJaa-l^gtridL in section 6. The dis- 
cussion is based upon the word makha, introduced in the statement, mak/ia 
ity eiad yajnandmadhey am ^ which is the language of the NaighaijtukasA This 
section is almost certainly later than Yaska: sundry Parirista-slokas also point 
to a very late date. Then comes the pravargya^ {6)^ beginning with the usual 
myth, copied almost verbatim from AB. i. 18 (cp. also AB. i. 4. 9). The per- 
formance aiid the mantras accord in the main with Vait 13. 25!! with which 
GB. at times agrees almost verbally (e. g. 13. 26, 30). The Vait (14. T) 
quotes the gharma-hymn from AVP. in fiill; the GB. cites it by pratika 
{gAarmam tapdmi). Certainly GB. presupposes the Sutra. 

2.2.7-~iz.Theupasad-days, aiad continuation of the agnistoma.-™ 
Sections 7 and 8 deal with the legend and general matters pertaining to the 
upasads^l the legend is treated with some de^'ee of independence 7 . Section 9 
joins Vait 15. 3 in the same recital of the divine women {devapainyah); both 
texts differ from the similar statements, MS. i. 9. 2; TA. 3. 9. iff.^. Section 10 
IS the Brahinana of Vait 16. 5, partly in verbal agreement: the source of the 
legendary explanation of the 33 ‘forms of the sacrifice^ {yajhafanus) is un- 
known^. Section ii, in verbal agreement with Vait. 16. 6, prescribes how 
the soma-sacrifice of a rival may be frustrated Section 1 2 is the Brahinana 
of Vait 16. 15 — 17, dealing with expiations for the overflow of the soma: 
the two texts agree verbally. The mantras of Vait 16. 17 are quoted frag* 
mentarily in GB. with explanatory remarks, quite as though the Vait were in 
this instance the Samhita of GB. 

2. 2. 13—15. The stomabhaga-mantras"^ — Section 13 begins with 
the legend of their origin, substantially the same as TS, 3. 5. 2. r, except that 
GB. omits very significantly the statement, tasmdd vdsistho brahma kdryalt, 
which is, of course, contrary to the doctrine of the Atharvan ritualists. The 
mantras in the sequel differ from those in Vait. and TS., but section 14 
shares with Vait 17. 16 the list of Atharvan vydhrtis (cp. GB. i. 3. 3), and 



120 11. Literature and History, i b. Atharva- Ved a and Gopatha-Brahman a. 


prescribes the use of om and janatj one on each side of the ordinary ones 
(e. g., o?n bkur janat)^ for the purpose of protection {rgb/iir evobhayato Hharv- 
dngirobJiir guptdbhir) The expression apa gd ^cease to sing^ occurs only 
here and at Vait 17. 4. Section 15, illustrating Vait. 17. 7, dwells upon the 
value of the stomabhdgas in overcoming the simultaneous sacrifice of a rival : 
the two texts share the long mantra, stutese etc. The Brahmana, though 
making some show of independence, is later than the Sutra. In continued 
touch with Vait, section 16 deals with the distribution of the agnldhra-^x^ 
at the close of the^ bahispavamdna, with the same praisas in both texts (Vait 

17. 12 — iS- i; cp. SB. 4. 2. 5. ii). Section 17, anent Vait 18. 5 (cp. TS. 3. i. 
10. i), deals with the pravrtdktitis^ oblations on choosing the priests; sections 

18, 19 (Vait 18. II — 15) with the practices about the sadas. The mantra, 
dhisnyebhyo namo namali^ Vait 18. ii, is alluded to fragmentarily in GB., as 
though the Vait occupied the place of a Samhita. A propos of Vait 19. 6, 
sections 20 — 22 describe the Hotar-priesfs oblations with the prasthiia-cw^^ 
at the three savanas. Since the Hotar is a Rigvedin these sections are pur- 
loined bodily from the AB. 6. 10; 6. ii. 6fF.; and 6. 12. 6ff. The prapathaka 
ends with two seemingly inconsequential sections (23, 24), the first of which 
is again taken up with the explanation of the terms vkaksanaratl vdc^ and 
canasitavati vac (see i. 3. 19); the last surprisingly bounds back to the 
darsapurmmdsa, urging the engagement of the gods {parigrhmyat) on the 
first of the new-moon and full-moon days, because these sacrifices are savrta^ 
L undertaken by many at the same time^^: The section seems to be the 
Brahmana of Vait i. 14. 

I Cp. Vait. 43. 32, 33; SB. II. 7. I. 2; ApS. 7. 28. S; MS. 2. 5 . ii. « Cp. 
AB. I. 24; vSB. 3. 4* 2, I fi; MS. 3. 7. lo. See Weber, IS. X. 362; Hillebrandt, 
Ritual-Litteratur, p. 127. — 3 But, anabhisasienyam /V/, in GB. 3, accords Avith TS. 
6. 2. 2. 4: the Vait. 13. i8 has ambhisastih. — 4 Yaska’s Nigh. 3. 17 ; Kautsavaya 
45 : cp. PAOS., October 1890, p. XLVUifi.* — 5 Haug, AB., Translation, p. 41, 
note i; Weber, IS. IX. 218—20; Hillebrandt, 1 . c. p. 127, 134 ff, — 6 Weber, 
IS. X. 36311.; Hillebrandt, 1 . c. 127.-7 Cp. SB. 3. 4. 4. 3 ff.; AB. i. 23; KB. 
8. 8; TS. 6. 2. 3; MS. 3. 8. 1. — S Bloomfield, ZDMG. XLVIIL 549. — 9 Gp. 
Garbe, Vait., Translation, 16. 5, note. GB. is cited by the scholiast to Pai?. 3. 
4. 16. — 10 See the remark on i. 3. 19, above, % 73, note 7. — Vait. 17. 4 ff.; 
TS. 3. 5 * 2. 8. 8; SB. 8. 5. 3; PB. i. 9. iff. — 12 cp. above under 1. 3.3. 

— 13 See the note on 1. 3. 19. 

§ 79. Third Prapathaka: 2.3.1 — ii. Agnistoina continued: the 
va§atkara and anuvasatkara; rtugrahas; etc. — By way of illustrating 
Vait 1 9. 8 — 12 which deals with the vasaikdra and aimvasatkara (acts of the 
Hotar) sections i — 6 of GB. present with slight modifications AB. 3. 5 — 3. 8. 
Yaska, Nirukta 8, 22, also presents the opening of AB. 3. 8. i; GB. 2. 3. 4 
in a form different from each, but it is not necessary in this instance to credit 
him with independent tradition any more than GB.; both have mouthed over 
the text of AB. The second part of section 6 (Vait 19. 18, 19) explains the 
blessing on drinking the soma, reproducing with verbal changes AB. 7. 33. 51! 
Sections 7, 8 treat rfugradas (Vait 20. 2): section 7 is partly identical with 
and wholly similar to AB, 2.29; section 8 in part corresponds to AB. 6. 14. 5 I 
Section 9 presents a legendary explanation of the sound //m (Vait 20. 15, 16), 
being written in good archaic Brahmana-language and deriving some inter- 
esting illustrations from every-day life. A closely similar passage has not 
been founder it may have been derived from a Saman-source with Atharvanic 
adaptations {himkrtydtharvdno brahmatvain kurvanti). Section 10, dealing 
with the dhdva and pratigara 4 oxmu\dLS^ (Vait 20. 15 ff.), is copied almost 
verbatim from AB. 3. 12 (cp. KB.-14. 3), excepting that the formulas them- 
selves are quoted in the spelling of Vait which differs from that of all the 



IV. The Gopatha-Brahmana. — C. Contents of the Uttar a-Brahmana, 121 


other texts Section ii, illustrating Vait. 21.3,4. is copied with slight alterations 
from KB. ii. 4 and 5, including the expression, iti ha smalm kausttakih^ 
which leaves no doubt as to its origin: cp. above, p. 102. 

2. 3. 12 — 19. The pratahsavana of the ekaha. — Section 12’' begins 
with a legend, similar to AB. 3. 14, in which Prajapati while performing an 
{agnistoma~)^z,cri^zt encounters Death whom he drives step by step from one of 
the iastras and stoiras of the agnistoma to the other. Sections 13 — 15 account 
for the three sasiras (following the djya and prauga) of the three assistants 
of the Hotar, the Maitravaruna, Brahmanacchamsin, and Achavaka^; these 
sections bear upon Vait. 20. 14. Although they contain many mantras which 
ought to guide to parallel chapters in other Brahmana-texts this is not the 
case;^ they seem original with GB., patterned perhaps after some KV.-sutra 
(cp. SS. 12. I ff.). Thus the mantra, ay am u tvd vicarsane (RV. 8. 17. 7 — 
AV. 20. 5. i) is not quoted outside of Vait. 21. 2 and GB. 2. 3. 14; indra 
piba pratikdmam suiasya (RV. 10. 112. i) only in GB. 2. 3. 14. Section 16 
motivates by a Brahmana, which again seems independent, the fourfold use 
of the dhdva (Jamsdvom) of the prdtai.savana in relation to Vait 20. 15 (cp- 
GB. 2. 4. 4 and 18). Sections 17 — 19 deal with the daksind^ the order in 
which it should be given to the priests, and the materials of which it shall 
consist (cp. Vait 21. 24 — 22.2): they are an almost verbatim copy of 
MS. 4* 3 . 3. 

2, 3. 20 — 2. 4. 4. The madhyamdinasavana of the ekaha. — The 
subject is treated in the main in the order of Vait, borrowing considerably 
from AB., but, as in the case of the pratahsavana^ some chapters seem to 
be original with GB, Sections 20, 21, reproducing almost literally AB. 3. 23, 
present the legend of the union of Sa (the Rk) with Ama (the Saman), 
resulting in the junction of three rcas to produce one sdman, etc. (cp. Vait 
22. 8). Section 22, reproducing AB. 3. 24, deals with the stotriya^ anurupa^ 
dkdyyd, pragdtka^ and nivids of the *niskevalya-s'asfra, and bears upon Vait. 
22.10 — 127, Section 23 presents a legendary account of Indra’s exclusive 
right to the niskevalya-sastra at the midday-pressure of the soma: Un the 
beginning there was but one soma-pressure, in the morning. Then Prajapati 
created the midday-pressure for his eldest son Indra’, The legend is quite 
different from that told AB. 3. 24. loff. (cp. KB. 15. 4); it is original, if we 

may trust the quotation of the mantra RV. 7. 98. g AV. 20. 87. 3, as this 

is not mentioned in any other text, not even the Vaitana. 

I Cp. also KB. 13* 9. — 2 Cp. the sigmalic aorist adrag^ p. 1 2 7, 1. 3. — 
3 Cp. TS. 6. 4. U. 3—4. ■— 4 HillebRANDT, L c. IOI ff. 5 E. g. adUmryo 

samsdvom, Vait. 20. 18; GB. here and 2. 4. 4; adhvaryo somsdva K§. 19. 6. 26; 

adhvaryo somsavo KB. 14. 3; SA 7* ^9* adhvaryo hmsdvom AB. 3. 12. 3; AS. 
5. 14. 3; ApS. i2. 27. 12. — 6 See Weber, IS. X. 353. The strictly^ Atharvanic 
division of the 17 Srauta-priests does not assign the Brahmanacchamsin to the 
Hotrakas, but makes him an assistant of the Brahman; see Vait. ii. 3; GB. i* 
4. 6. — 7 The word praiknia ‘veiled’ does not occur outside of GB. and Vsdt. 
(22. 12). 

S 80. Fourth Prapathaka; 2. 4. i — 4. The madhyaindinasavana 
concluded. — The madhyamdina is continued in sections i — 3 with an account 
of the statriya^ anurupa, pragdtha^ etc.,/pf the three Hotrakas (cp.2.3.13 — 15). 
They are based upon AS. 7. 4. i ff.; SS. 7. 22—24, worked over slightly into 
Brahmatia-form. Section 4 accounts for the five-foid use of the dhdva of the 
madhyamdina ^adhvaryo samsdvom)^'‘. the Brahmana seems original; cp. GB. 
2, 3. 16 and 2. 4. 18. 

2. 4, 5 — 18. The tirtlya-savana of the ekaha, — Continuing in the 
order of Vait, section 5 illustrates the pdtmvata-graha (Vait 22. 3), and the 



122 n. Literature AND History, ib. Atharva-Veda andGopatha-Brahmana. 


consumption of the Agnidhra’s share in the lap of the Nestar (Vait. 25. 5). 
The Brahmana is borrowed from AB. 6. 3. 8 — Section 6 illustrates the 
offerings of shavings (Vait 23. 12); the scattering of barley-grains in the 
dliavaniya-fiit (Vait 2 3. 13); the pouring of the soma-cups west of the cdtvdla- 
pits (Vait 2 3. 14); the Brahmana is borrowed from KB. 18.7 and 8. Section 
7 deals with the purification of the sacrificer, and is similar to, yet different 
from Vait. 23. 22. The mantras, ah hud da^ahy and the drapsavatyah (sc. 
rcaJi) occur in both Vait and GB.; but instead of the Paippalada-hymn, 
ie grdvdy of the Vait, the GB. has saumlhliih^ (sc. rgbhtk): the Bralimaiia 
seems to be derived from an unkown Srauta-source. Section 8, illustrating 
Vait 24. 15, 16, describes the burning up of the vcdi and the offering of 
grits {saktuhoma ) : TS. 3-. 3. 8, 2 ff. presents a fairly close parallel. That the 
TS. is in fact its source seems likely, because the next section (9) interrupts 
the Older of the Vait, yet is also derived from the same chapter of TS. 
Section 9 begins with a rite on the ekdstakd-d.zy bearing, out of order, on 
Vait 31. 4, s, and being a continuation of the Brahmana in TS. 3. 3. 8. 4 — 6, 
which is copied almost literally. But at the end the section returns to the 
order of Vait (24. 14), describing the agnisafndropana (cp. TS. 3. 4. 10. 4). 
Section 10 deals with the relation of the three savanas to the day and their 
symbolic connection with the three main positions of the sun: it is borrowed 
from AB. 3. 44. 

At this point the GB. turns to the sastras of the trfiyasavanay in a 
treatment analogous to that of the first savanas (2. 3. 12 — 19, and 2.3. 
30 — 2. 4. 4). Sections ii — 14 introduce a legend, elsewhere unknown in 
this form. The gods Indra, Agni, Varupa, Brhaspati, and Vispu prevented 
the Asuras from entering the evening twilight, and thus ruining the iastras of 
the evening. Agni changes into a horse {asvd) and enters the conflict first; 
hence the sdkamaiva-sdman heads the sastras at the irtiya-savana^. The 
five gods, engaged in the conflict, are identified respectively with vdCy pranas 
manasy cahsus, irotmy and through these pranas'^ with Prajapati; reasohs 
are assigned why they are praised at the trtlyasavana. Finally, these gods, 
barring Agni who has been provided for in the sdkamasvay are distributed 
among the sastras of the ^ three Hotrakas: Indra-Varupa with the Maitra- 
varuna; Indra-Brhaspati with the Brahmanacchamsin; and Indra-Visn.u with 
the Achavaka^. The next three sections (15 — 17) state the mantras for the 
tikihUy stotriya.^ anurupUy etc., of the Hotrakas, being based upon Rig-Vedic 
sources (cp. AS. 6. i. 2; SS. 9. 2 — 4). Section 18 concludes the agnistoma 
with an account of the fourfold dhdva of the trttyasavana (adhvaryo saih" 

samsdvom) which seems original, like the parallel sections 2. 3. 16, and 

2.4. 4. ' 

2.4.19. The §0(}asin-sacrifice. — Section 19 concludes the prapathaka 
with. a brief explanation of this sacrifice, thus returning to the order of Vait. 
(25. 12). The Brahmapa is borrowed from AB. 4. i. 5 — 8. 

^ Cp. AB. 3. j2. 3; KB, 14. 3.-3 Weber, IS. X. 390; IUixebRandt, 1 . c. 

133. — 3 Cp. ApS. 13. 20. 8. — 4 Cp. AB. 3. 49; PB. 8. 8. i—S- — 5 Cp. AB. 

3* so; PB. 8 . 8 . 6 , 7. 

§ 81. Fifth Prapathaka: 2.5.1— 5. The atiratra'performances. — 
These continue the order of Vait, chapter 26: the GB. is patched together 
out of passages of AB. and KB. (cp. above, p. 102). Section i, almost 
identical with AB. 4. 5, explains the origin of the atirdtra as typifying the 
expulsion of the Asuras out of the night by Indra and the metres, his allies; 
the- three periods {paryayas) represent the successive acts of expulsion from 
the first part of the night, midnight, and the last part of the night. Section 2, 



IV. The Gopatha-Brahmana. — C. Contents of the Uttara-Brahmana. 123 


borrowed from AB. 4. 6. 4 — 7, explains the advantages of the Astras at the 
three faryayas (Vait. 26. 3). Section 3, borrowed from AB. 4, 6, 8 — 14, ex- 
plains how the pavamdna-stotras^ which properly belong to the day alone, 
are also provided for the night; it also explains other features of the atirdtra 
that are patterned after the soraa-performances of the dayh Section 4, 
borrowed from KB. 17. 7, identifies the fixtures of the sacrifice with the 
members of the cosmic man {purusa)^ and the officiating priests with the 
breaths and other functions of the body. The first part of section 5 deals 
once more with the expulsion of the Asuras: this time the statement is 
borrowed from KB., in mechanical continuation of 17. 7, whereas the first 
discussion of the same theme was derived from the AB. The compiler has 
not taken the trouble to assimilate his excerpts. The second part of section 5, 
borrowed from KB. 17. 9, explains the distribution of the metres at 
the iastras. 

2. 5. 6 — 10. The sautramani, vajapeya, and aptoryama rites. — 
The next two sections disturb the order of the Vait, which treats the saufrd- 
mam in chapter 30, after the vajapeya and aptoryama. Section 6 presents 
one of the legends that have attached themselves to the sautrdmanl, being 
SB. 12. 8. 3. I — 2; section 7, illustrating Vait 30. 16, 18, deals with the 
saman-chants at the sautrdmanv. it almost copies SB. 12. 8. 3. 23— -28 ^ In 
section 8 the text returns to the order of Vait (27. 1 — 17), illustrating the 
r^'iZ/.^'^-ceremony by a Brahmana obviously copied from PB. 18. 7 Sections 
9, 10 deal with the aptorydma^\ the presentation is not in very close touch 
with Vait. (27. 18 ff.), nor has it been possible to find its source in the 
published Brahmaijias. Cp. in a general way PB. 20. 3. 2 ff. 

2. 5. II — 2. 6. 16 (end). The ahina-(sattra-)sacrifices. — To these 
performances 5 are devoted the remaining sections of GB., in general corre- 
spondence with the order and treatment of Vait. 31 ff. The Brahmanas are 
borrowed en bloc from the sixth book of AB. with the usual slight alterations; 
the mantras are assimilated to some extent to those of Vait. Section ii is 
composed of AB. 6. 17. i, 2 and 6. 5; section 12 == AB. 6. 6; section 13 = 
AB. 6. 7; section 14 is very similar to AB. 6. 8; section 15 is almost identical 
with AB, 6. 18. 4ffv introduced by a sentence from AB. 6. 17. 2, and ending 
in a passage from AB. 6, 17. 3> 4; cp, Vait 31. 19, 20. 

GB. shares with Vait 20. 15 the .expression, uiiamat prafihardt, — ^ Both 
GB, and* Vait. read samsyana for samsdna, in and elsewhere; cp, Garbe’s 
note on Vait 30. 16. — .3 Weber, Ueber den Vajapeya, SPAW., 1892, p, 765 ff. 
— 4 Eggeling, SBE. XLI, p. xx; Hillebrandt, I c. p. 138. — S ^ The GB. 
designates them as anaikdhika s=s= akJna (cp. also ahargana)'. the word is wanting 
in the lexicons. 

S 82. Sixth Prapathaka: The ahlna-sacrifices continued. — 
Section x is composed of AB. 6. 18. i — 3; 6. 19. i — 10 (cp. Vait 31. 25). 
Section 2 continues from the middle of AB. 6. 19. 10 through to 6. 20, 
with some omissions on the part of GB. (cp. Vait 32. 10). Sections 3 — 5 
are almost identical with AB. 6. 21 — 23 (cp. Vait 35, 12, and 35. 2, 4). 
Section 6 explains"' why the Hotar recites two uktkas and one sukta, whereas 
his assistants, the Hotrakas, recite one uktha and two suktasi the first part 
of section 7 specifies the sastras of the Hotrakas to their respective pairs 
of divinities. Neither of these passages seems to be derived • from any 
known Brahmana; cp., however, AB. 6. 13 and 14 (especially AB. 6. 13. 7 
with GB. p. 167, 1. 3#,). The end of section 7, dealing with the so-called 
silpani, is nearly identical with AB. 6. 27. i — 5. Section S is almost identical 
with AB. 6. 27. 6—30. 4; section 9 wWi AB. 6. 30. 5—6. 31; section 10 with 


124 n. Literature and History, i b. Atharva-V eda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


AB. 5- 9 and lo (cp. Vait 31. 27); section ii with AB. 5. 11—5. 12. 3, 
finishing with 6. 32. i, 2. Section 12 is composed of a selection of passages 
some of which aie identical with paragraphs of the AB.; others exhibit a 
certain degree of independence, yet seem to have been suggested by the 
same text: AB. 5. 19. 12 (cp. Vait. 32. 12); 6.29.1 (cp. Vait. 32. 13); fi.'ag.a 
(the vrsakapi-hymn] cp. Vait. 32. 14); and 6. 32 (cp. Vait. 32. 19). Section 13 
is compiled similarly from AB. 6. 33. i — 5 3 ^- S®- 5 )j 

33. 16, 17 (cp. Vait 32. 27; KB. 30. 7); 6. 33. 19 (cp.Vait 32. 22); 6.33.18 
(cp. Vait. 32. 23); 6. 33. 20 (cp. Vait 32. 26). Section 14 is compiled from 
AB.6.34— 36. 3 (cp.Vait32. 28— 30); section IS works over AB. 6. 36.4 — 7 
with a considerable degree of independence (cp. Vait 32. 31); and, finally, 
section 16 is based upon AB. 6. 36. 8 — 17 (cp. Vait 32. 33, 35). 



LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS. 


AA. ” Aitareya-Ara^yaka. 

AB. — Aitareya-Brahmania. 

Abliandlims: =. Abhandlung- iiber den Atharva-Veda. 

AG. ^ Asvalayana-Grhyasutra. 

AJPh^ = American Journal of Philology. 

APAW. =» Abhandliingen der Kgl. Preussisclien Akademie der Wissenscliaften. 
ApDh. s=! Apastamba-DharmasQtra. 

ApG. = Apastamba-Grhyasutra. 

ApMB. = Apastamba-MantrabrShmaiia, or Mantrapatha. 

ApS. = Apastamba-Srautasutra. 

ArS. «= jVrariyaka-Samhita. 

AS. = Asvalayana-Srautasiltra. 

Ath. Paddh. = Atliarva-(or Ath.arvanTya-)Paddhati to Kau§ika-Sfitra. 

Ath. Paris. = Atharva-PariSi.sta. 

Ath. Prat. == Atharva-PrStiSakhya. 

AV. *=: Atharva-Veda in the Saunaklya school. 

AVP. == Atharva-Veda in the Paippakda school. 

A'V^AW. Abhandlungen der Kais. Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Wien. 
Baudh. Dh, = Baudhayana-Dharmasfltra. 

BB. == Bezzenberger’s Beitrage zur Kunde der Indogermanischen Sprachen. 
BDh. == Baudhayana-Dharmasutra. 

BKSGW. *= Berichte der Kgl. Sachsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften. 
B^hU. and Brh. Ar. Up. «= Bjrhad-Ara^yaka-Upanisad. 

BRW. ^ B5HTLINGK und Roth, Sanskrit Worterbuch. 

ChU. and Chand. Up. = Chlndogya-Upanisad. 

Contributions. = Bloomfield, Contributions to the Interpretation of the Veda. 
DLZ. •== Deutsche Litteraturzeitung. 

Gaut. Dh. =s=s Gautama-Dharmasutra. 

GB. « Gopatha-BrShma^a. 

GDh. = Gautama-Dharmasutra. 

GG. 5= Gobhila-GrhyasQtra. 

GGA. ==* Gottingische gelehrte Anzeigen. 

HASL. — History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature. 

HG. — Hirariyakeii-Grhyasfltra. 

Introd. = Introduction. 

IS. — Indische Studien. 

IStr. = Indische Streifen. 

JA. = Journal Asiatique. 

Jaim. Br. = Jaiminlya-Brahmauia. 

JAOS. »=s Journal of the American Oriental Society. 

JB. = Jaiminlya-Brahmana. 

JBAS. — Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal. 

JBU. =» Jaiminlya-BrahmaQa-Upanisad. 

KapS, Kapi^thala-Saiphita. 

Kau§. == Kausika-Stltra. 

KB* == Kau^ltaki-Brahmana. 

Kel « Kesava’s Paddhati to Kausika-Sutra. 

KS. «« Kathaka-Samhita. 

Kis. = Katyayana-Srautasutra. 

KZ. ~ Kuhn’s Zeitschrift fur vergleichende Sprachforschung. 

LS. = Latyayana-^rautasutra. 

Mahabh. « Mahabharata. 



126 


List of Abbreviations. 


MG. = Manava-Grhyasutra. 

MHASL. == Max Mijller, History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature. 

MS. == Maitrayani-Saiphita. 

MU. = Maitri-Upanisad. 

Naks. ssrs Naksatrakalpa. 

Nigli, == Nighantuka. 

Nir. «= Nirukta 

OLS. == Oriental and Linguistic Studies. 

OST. = Original Sanskrit Texts. 

Pan. ~ Paigiini. 

PADS. = Proceedings of the American Oriental Society. 

PB. “ Pahcavimsa-Brahmana, or Taudya-Brahmaina. 

PBAS. = Proceedings of the Asiatic Society of Bengal. 

Pet Lex. = Petersburg Lexicon. 

PG. P§raskara-Gyhyasiitra. 

RV. = Rig-Veda. 

Rvidh. = Rig-vidhSna. 

RVKh. =- Rig-Veda Khila. 

Say. Sayaua. 

SB. = Satapatha-Brshmana. 

SB. = ^advimsa-Brahmapa. 

SBE. = Sacred Books of the East 

Seven I^mns = Bloomfield, Seven Hymns of the Atharva-Veda. 

SG. = Sahkhayana-Grhyasiitra. 

SMB. ~ Ssmaveda-Mantrabrahmaua, 

SPAW. == Sitzungsberichte der Kgl. Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. 
S§, = SShkhayana-Srautasutra. 

St and sts. stanza, and stanzas. 

SV. =s= Sama-Veda. 

Svidh. = Samavidhana-BrShina^a. 

TA. » Taittirlya-Xrauyaka. 

TB. = Taittirlya-Brahmana. 

TS. » Taittirlya-Samhita. 

Up. = Upanisad, 

VaDh. and VSs. Dh. = Vasistha-DharmaSastra. 

Vait. = Vaitana-Sutra. 

Ved. Stud. == PiscHEL und Geldner, Vedische Studien. 

Vend. ==5 Vendidad. 

Verz. =5=s Verzeichniss der Sanskrit- und Prakrit-Handschriften in der Kgl. Bibliothek 
zu Berlin. 

ViDh. and Vis. Dh. == Visuu-Smyti. 

VS. = Vajasaneyi-Samhita in the Madhyamdina school. 

VSK. ~ Vajasaneyi-Samhita in the Ka^va school. 

WL. Weber, Indische Literaturgeschichte. 

WZKM. = Wiener Zeitscbrift fiir die Kunde des Morgenlandes. 

Yajn, and Yajuav. = Yajnavalkya-Dharmaiastra. 

YV. -= Yajur-Veda. 

Yvidh, ss= Yajur-vidhana. 

ZDMG. Zeitscbrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft 
Zimmer = Zimmer, Altindisches Leben. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


page 

PART I. THE ATHARVA-VEDA IN 
GENERAL. 

A. Character and Chronology of i 
THE AtHARVA-VEDA. 

$ I. External comparison with the 

other Vedas i 

$ 2 . Relative chronology of the po- 
pular and hieratic literatures 2 
S 3. Chronology of the Atharvan 

redaction 2 

S 4. Relation of the AV. to the Br^h- 

maijas, and the Dharma-texts 3 

B Historical Character of the 
Atharvan, and its Relation to 
the House-books. 

§ 5. The mutual relations of the AV. 
and the Grhya-sutras, and their 
historical value .... 5 

S 6. Scope of the AV. as a record 

of ancient life 6 

C, The Names of the Atharva-Veda 
AND their Meanings. 

§ 7, The compound Atharvahgirasah 
and the meaning of its two 
members, Atharvan and Ahgiras 7 
S 8. Cause of the distinctionbetween 

Atharvan and Angiras . . 9 

S 9. The terms Bhrgvahgirasah, 
Brahraaveda, and the designa- 
tions of Atharvan priests . . 9 

I ) . The Schools of the Atharva-Veda. 

S 10. Character and sources of the 
• reports on the schools of 
the AV. . ... ... II 

% II. The nine sakhas of the AV. Ii 
S 12. Estimate ofthe historical value 
of the sakhas, and their relation 
to the teachers of the Sutras 1 3 
S 13. The two Samhita-^akhas, the 

Saunaklya and the Paippalada 13 
S 14. Brief account of the Paippa- 


lada-sakha ...... 14 

E. Brief Sketch of Atharvanic 
Literature. 

S 15. The Sainhitas, Shtras, and 

Brahtna^a . , , . . . 1$ 

S 16. The Kalpas and the ParEistas 16 
S 17 - Or the Smrti of Paithinasi . 17 

S 18, The Atharvan Upani§ads . 18 


page 

§ 19. Grammatical and text-histor- 
ical treatises . . . . 20 

F. The Position of the Atharva- 
Veda IN Hindu Literature in 
General. 

$ 20. General estimate of the AV. 21 
$ 21 , The Atharvan in the RV. . 21 

S 22. The Atharvan in the AV. itself 22 
$ 23. The Atharvan in the Srauta- 

texts . 22 

S 24. The Atharvan in the Up ani§ads 24 
S 25. The Atharvan in the Grhya* 

satras 24 

§ 26. The Atharvan in the law- 

literature (dharma) ... 25 

S 27. The Atharvan in the Maha- 

bharata 26 

% 28. The Atharvan in Sanskrit, 

Jaina, and Bauddhaliterature 27 
% 29. The Atharvan in grammatical, 
lexical, and text-historical 
works , 27 

G. The Atharva-Veda in the View 
OF ITS Ritualistic Itterature. 

S 30. The attitude of the ritual texts 
towards the Atharvan and its 

priests 28 

S 31. Exaltation ofthe Atharvan, and 
the office of the Brahman in 
the ritual texts .... 29 

$ 32. The office of the Purohita in 

the ritual texts . . . # 29 

S 33. Causes leading up to the ex- 
altation of the Atharvan and 

its priests .3^ 

$ 34, Connection of the Purohita 
with the AV., and interrelation 
of Purohita and Brahman . 32 

PART II. THE REDACTION AND EX- 
TERNAL FORM OF THE ATHARVA- 
VEDA IN THE SCHOOL OF SAU- 
NAKA. 

A. Division and Arrangement of the 
Hymns. 

[ S 35* The division of the Saiphits 

into 20 books , ... 34 

S 36. Arrangement of the books 
according to hymns of differ- 
ent, length . . . . . 35 

S 37* Arrangement of the hymns 

1 within the books ... 3^ 



Table of Contents. 


B. The Metres of the Atharvan and 
THK iR Relation to the Critical 
Restoration of the Text. 

S 38. The metres, with special refer- 
ence to the Atharvanic (popu- 
lar) anu§lubh 

S 39. On the critical restoration of 
Atharvan metres . . . 

% 40. Order of stanzas and conca- 
tenation as critical aids 

C. The Relation of the Atharva- 
Vkda to the Rkmalnlng Hymn- 
Collections. 

S 41. Special features of the Athar- 
van collection ; its connection 
with ApS. and TB. . . . 

S 42. Relation of the language ofthe 
AV. to that of the RV. . 
g 43. The various, readings of the 
RV. and the AV, . , . 

g 44. Traces of superior tradition 
in the AV. as compared with 

the RV, 

g 45. Adaptation and expansion of 
Yajus-themes for Atharvanic 

purposes 

g 46. The various readings of the AV. 

and the Yajus-Samhitas . . 

g 47, The various reading of theAV. 

and the Srauta-sfltras , . 

g 48. Traces of superior tradition in 
the AV. as compared with the 
Yajus-texts ..... 

PART III. CONTENTS OF THE 
ATHARVA-VEDA IN THE SAU- 
NAKlYA-SCHOOL. 
g 49. Classification of the hymns 
g Class i). Charms to cure dis- 
eases and possession by de- 
mons (bhaisajyani) , 
g 51. Class 2). Prayers for long life 
and health (ayu§yani) 
g 52. Class 3). Imprecations against 
demons, sorcerers, and ene- 
mies (abhicarikapi and k^tya- 
, pratiharapani) . . , . 

g 53. Class 4)* Charms pertaining to 
women (stxtkarma^i) . . . 

g 54. Class 5). Charms to secure har- 
mony, influence in the assem- 
bly, and the like (sammana- 
syani, etc.) . . . * . . 

S 55, Class 6). Charms pertaining to 
royalty (rajakarma^i) * , 

S 56, Class 7). Prayers and impre- 
cations in the interest of 
Btahmans ...... 


• paKC 

g 57. Class 8). Charms to secure 
prosperity and freedom from 
danger (paustikani) . . , 80 

S 58. Class 9). Charms in expiation 
of sin and defilement (praya- 

1 Scittani) 83 

S 59. Class 10). Cosmogonic and 

! theosophic hymns . . . .86 

g 60. Class 1 1). Ritualistic and gene- 

I ral hymns 91 

S 61. Class 12^ The books dealing 

with individual themes (books 

93 

S 62. Gass 13), The twentieth book 95 

S 63, Gass 14}. The kuntapa-hymns 96 

partiv.thegopatha-brAhmana., 

A. Relation of the Text to the 
Atharva-Veda and its Position in 
Vedic Literature. 

S 64. General remarks .... loi 

$ 65. The Uttara-Brahmaua . .102 

S 66. The Parva-Brahmaijia . . 104 

B. Contents of the PCrva-Br Ahman a. 

S 67. First Prapaihaka: 1. 1. i— 15. 

An Atharvanic cosmogony in 
' Upani^ad manner . , , 107 

S 68. First Prapaihaka: 1.1.16—30. 

The Praaava-Upani§ad, being 
a cosmogonic account deriv- 
ing creation from the om , 108 
S 69. First Prapaihaka: 1.1,31—38. 

The Gayatrl-Upanisad . . no 

S 70. First Prapaihaka: 1. 1.39. The 

3 camana-rite , . . . .no 

S 71. Second Prapaihaka: 1,2.1 — 9. 

The duties of the Brahma-- 
carin . , . . , , , no 

g 72- Second Prapaihaka concluded. 

Various subjects • , . , ill 

S 73 * Third Prapaihaka. Various 

subjects .113 

S 74 * Fourth Prapaihaka. Mystic- 
theosophic exposition of the 
sattra of the year * ^ . , 115 

S 75, Fifth Prapaihaka: 1,571—22. 
Exposition of the sattra of the 
year concluded . . . ,115 

g 76. Fifth Prapaihaka: 1.5, 23—25. 
Metrical treatise on tbesacrifice 117 

C. Contents of the Uttara-Brah- 
mana (the Yajnakrama). 

g 77. First Prapaihaka . . . ,117 

S 78. Second Prapaihaka , . .no 

S 79 * Third Prapaihaka . . . 120 

S 80. Fourth Prapaihaka . . .121 

S 81. Fifth Prapaihaka .... 122 
g 82. Sixth Prapaihaka . , . .123 

List of Abbreviations . . , , .12c 


I. SANSKRIT INDEX. 

.The references in both Indexes are to pages. 


amholiiigah (sc. rcah) 83 note 
27. ' 

Agni, his relation to life- 
bestowing charms 64. 
agnicayana 92, I18. 

Agni Parikjjit 97, 
agnistbma 91, 114, 
agnisamaropana- 122. 
agniiiotra 114, 116. 
agnyadheya 112. 

Ahgiras, mythic fire-priests i, 
9, 10, 23; origin of 107, 
117; name of an Atharvanic 
teacher 1 9 (Ahgir), 24 ; sages 
34, 107; as a name ofAV. 
(its witchcraft) 8, 9, 23, 65 ; 
designation of AV. as a 
whole 27; their conflicts 
with the Adityas 8, 68 note 
3, 115. Cp. itugirasa. 
afigirasah viin^inah 34, 107. 
Aja Ekapad 87, 90. 
aja pahcaiidana 78. 
ajasfugl 62, 
ajhatayiiksma 60. 
ajyeyalsL (of Brahmans) 76, 87. 
atithigva, ‘presenting a cow 
to guests’ 7 note 2. 
atithipati 90. 

atimttyu-sava 79 note 1 7. 
atiratra 102, 122- 
ativada 99, loi note 7- 
Atharvaka-vidhana 17. 
Atharva-tarpaha I 7 '* 
Atharvan, mythic fire-prJest 
I, 5 note 8, 9, 10, 23; as 
a name of AV- (its blessings) 
8, 9, 65; origin of 107; 
popular etymology of 1 1 
note 9; derivatives of 9; 
name of a teacher I9 ; priests 
and sages 9, 34, 107; typical 
priest 77. Cp. atharva^ia, 
Atharva-Prati^akhya 20, 35, 
40, 96- Cp. Caturadhya- 
yikS. 

Atharvavedoktam jyotisam 17. 
Atharvaugirasah i, 7, 9 (ex- 
plmiation), 22, 25, 27, 32, 
InilcHATyan .Research- II, 1 b. 


107, 1 1 7, 120. cp. Bhrgvau- 
girasah. 

Atharvahgirovid 104. Cp. 

Bhrgvaugirovid. 
Adbhuta^anti 17. 
adbhutani 83, 85. Cp. omens 
and portents. 

AnukramanI (of AV.) 20, 40 
note 17,41. Cp.Brhatsarva'’, 
and Sarvanii®. 
anuvasatkara 120. 
anustubh, popular and hieratic 
41; in wedding-charms 41. 
anaikshika = ahina 123 note 
5 - 

apacit (apaci) 59, 61. 
apanodanani (sc. suktani) 76 
note II. 

apam sdktani 15 note 20, 93. 
apagha-hymn 82. 
apamarga 67, 69 note 1 6. 
aptoryama 123. 
apratiratha-sukta 76, 118. 
abadhyata (of Brahmans) 76. 
abhicara 66. Cp. abhicarijeani. 
Abhicara-kalpa 8. Cp. Aiigi- 
rasa-kalpa. 
abhiplava 115, 116. 
abhiseka-gana, and, -mantrah 
15 note 20, 94. 
abhivarta havis (mani) 93. 
aralu-amulet 66. 

Arati 71- 

arundhatl 61. 

arghya-ceremony 7 note 2. 
Arbudi 75. 

Aryaman 71. 
alaji 61. 
avi-sava 78« 

aslilabhasanam 98, 99. Cp. 
obscenity. 

a^vamedha 74, 98, 100. 
asat, ‘non-being’, in witchcraft 

I 3, S6. 

asura-veda 108- 
astrta-amulet 64. 
ahargana 123 note 5- 
ahTna-(sattra-)sacrifices 1 23. 
Cp, sattrC 


Aksepa, commentary onVai- 
tSna-Sutra 1 6. 
agrSyana 118. 

ahgirasa, witchcraft, contrast- 
ed with atharvana 8, 9, 22, 
51, 62 note I, 10 $, ,107, 
112, 1 1 3 ; ahgirasa-sages 

107. Cp. Aiigiras and abhi- 
carikani. 

Ahgirasa-Kalpa 8, 17. 
Ahgirasa-veda 65, 107, io8, 
1 18, 

acamana no. 
ajijhasenyah 99. 
atman in AV. 88. 
Atreya-priest 1 1 2. 
atharvana, blessings, contrast- 
ed with ahgirasa 8, 9, 22, 
62 note 1, 105, 107, 112, 
113; ahgirasa-sages 107. 
Cp. Atharvan. 
Atharvana-pramitaksara 17. 
Atharvana-siitra, a gramma- 
tical treatise 20. 
Atharvamya-paddhati 18. 
Adityas, in conflict with Augi- 
rases 8, 68 note 3, 115. 
adityahgirasyah (sc. ?cah) 99. 
Apastamba - Srautasiitra 45* 
aprl-s^kta 54, 92. 
abayu 61, 

abhieSrikanx 22, 65. Cp, Siigi- 
rasa. 

Ayu 64. 

Ayur-Veda 58. 
ayusyani (sc. suktani) 8 1- 
Arapyaka-jyotisam 17- 
asura papman 107 note 8. 
Asuifkalpa 13, 17, 20 note 13. 
asrava 59, 60. 
ahanasyah 99. 

itihasa-veda 108. 

Idhma Angirasa 103, 118. 
Indra, prototype of kings 74. 
Tndragathah 98. 
indramahotsava 17, 76 note 6. 
Buphali 13. 
ijgtapilitam 76. 

' 9' 



130 II. Liiterature and HiS'roRY. i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


ucchista-hyitin 87, 90. 
Uttamapatala 17, 20, 35, 40 
note 6. 

iittara-brahmana 101, 102. 
Uddalaka Aru|\i 113 — 115. 
udyuga 60. 
upajika 61. 
upanayana 64. 

Upavarsa 16. 
upasad-days 119. 

Urva^i 64. 

ytugralia 120. 
rsihasta, a ceremony 64. 

ekagu (agni^^oma) 105, 114. 
Ekaclandisamnyasa-upanisacl 
(and -vidhi) 18. 
ekastaka 82, 122. 
ekaha 121. 

aitasapraUpa 96, 97, 98, 100, 
ioi note 12. 

odana-sava 78. 

om, origin of 107, 108, ho;; 
as the vyahrti of the auspi* 
cions parts of the AV. 8, 
105, 109, U3, 120. 

AuSanasadbhutani 17. 

kanva, a kind of demon 62. 
Kabandha Atharva^ia 111,112. 
karkipravadah (sc. rcah) 81. 
Kaiyapa 20 note 7. 
Ksiiikayana 13. 

Kalhaka Kcaka 14. 

Kama 70, 87, 

kamya i.slayah, kamyestayah 

66, 72, ’74/So, 83(bisy93' 
102, iiS, 119. 
karavyah (sc. rcah) 97. 

Kara 114.’ 

Kala, hymn to 89. 
kimidin 52. 

kiintlpa-hymns 15, 16, 37, 
79 note II, 95, 96, 100. 
kustha-plant 59, 60, 62. 
kGdI-plant 77. 
kQsmapda 86 note 3. 

9 » 52, 65. 

kl'tyapratiharapani 65, 68. 
kevaladin 85. 

Ke§ava 16. 

Kantsavya, or Kants.avaya, 
author of an Athar-van Nir- 
ukta 17, 20. 120 note 4. 
Kanrupathi 13, 

Kaulika 13,' 16, 17, 57. 
*ksatra-veda’ 10, 73. 
k§etriya 60. 

Ganamala 17. 

garbhadrmhanani 72 note H. 


garbhadhana 71. 
gavSmayana 115. 
gatha nara^amsyah 100. 
gadhapratistha h 6. 
gayatri (savitn) 79, 89, 91 note 
12, no. 

Gayatri-Upanisad 20, 106, 1 j.0. 
Garuda-Upanisad 19, 61, 69 
‘.note 7. 

Gargya 13. 
guh^ ghrta 93. 
godana 64. 

goptarah io8, 117 note 13. 
go-sava 78. 

Grahaynddha 17. 
gramayajaka, and -yajin 73, 

1 17 note 14. 
gramya vyadhi 63. 
grahi 62. 

Glava Maitreya no. 

gharma-sukta 92, 103, 119. 
ghora, ghora-veda 8, 105, 116. j 
Ghora Angirasa 8, 23. ; 

Caturadhyayika 12, 14. Cp. j 
Atharva-Prati§akhta. j 

caturveda 105. 1 

catuhdarava-sava 78. 
Caranavyaha u, 17, 20,104,; 

105, 106 note I, 107 note 7. 
catuhprasya odana 112. 
catnrmasyani J02, 112, it 8. 
Caranavaidya 13. 
clpudru-tree 62. 
ca^akarma 64. 

CaUka-Upanisad 19. 90 note i, 

94. 

Cyavana Bhargava, or Angi-- 
rasa 72. 

jaugida-tree 60, 62. 

Jajali 12. 
janakalpah 98. 

janat, vyahrti of the terrible 
parts of AV: 8, 105, 108, 
109, 1 13, 120. 
jambha 62. 

Jalada, Jaladayana 12, 13. 
Jajala 12, 13.' 

Jatikayana 13. 
jala^a 6i. 

jivah (sc. rcah) 15 note 20. 

takman 58, 59. 

Tak§aka VaUaleya 61. 
tanSnaptra-cereinony 119. 
tabuva, ‘taboo’ 61. 

Taiksya Aristanemi 82. 
Iptlya-savana I2i, 122. 
trsnagyhlta 62. 
TrikaiRidamaBi^ana 20 
Trita 85. 

Tri§apidhi 75; 
tri^ara^a-vrata 93 note 6. 
tris^ubh, in funeral-hymns 41. 


Tauda, Taudayana 12, 
Tvastar-Savitar 4. 

daksinai 121 ; its consequences 
100; daksina-hymns 76,77, 
78, 87, 90. . 

Dadhyanc Ahgirasa or Athar- 
vana 23, 116, 1 18. 
Damtyosthavidhi, a gramma- 
tical treatise 20. 
daksayana-amulet 53, 64. 
dadhikra-stanzas 100. 
danastuti 76, 77, 97, 99, 1 00. 
daralak§apa 72 note 10. 
Darila 16. 

dig-yukte (sc. sukte) Si. 
di^Sm klptayah 98. 

dik§i 79, 114/ 115. 

dlk§ita 84. 

Dlrghatamas-hymn 86, 88. 
Dii§in = Mara 105, lio. 
deva, as designation of Brah- 
mans 3, 76. 

Devadar^a, BevadarSin 12, 13, 
devanltha 99. 

Doiapati 105. 

drapsavatyali (sc. rcal>) 1.22. 
Dvitapanlya-Upani.^ad 1 8. 

DhQrtakalpa 17, 20 note 13. 
dhniva havis 93. 

Nak§atrakalpa 37, 35. 
naraian.syah (sc. rcah) 76, 79 
note 11, 97, 100, 
nitatnl, a plant 6t. 

Nirukta 45, 119; Nirukta- 
nighantu of Kautsavya 20. 
nirrtikarmani 86 note 19. 
niskevalya-sastra 121. 
nairbSdhya havis 93. 
nairhasta havis 93. 

Nyarbudi 75. 

pak§ahata 60. 
pahcakalpa, ®kalpin lo, 17, 
Pahcatapanlya-Upanisad 18. 
PahcapatalikS 20, 35. 

Parik§it 97. 

Paribabhrava 1 3. 
pari-vid 85. 
parivrktl mahi§I 98. 

Parj^i§tas of AV. 16. 
parihasta 71. 

parvan, fictitious subdivision 

ofAV. 35- 

pavamSna-stotra 123. 
pa§ubandha 92. 
psti-plant 73. 
pStnlvata-graha 121. 
plpayaki$ma 60. 
pSpi' lak§ml 85. 
pEpmagrhIta 86 note 5. 
pSman 60. 

parik§ityah (sc. rcah) 97. 
pariplavamakhyanam 10 1 note 
14. 



L Sanskrit Index. 


Pdrthasravasa 13. 

Pippaladi II, 19, 24. 
pippalStii-.santi-gana 12, 14. 
pisilca-veda 108, 
pun savana 71. 
pui.iya laksmi 85. 
purana-veda io8. 
purusamedha 98, loo. 
purusa-sukta 88. 

Purfiravas 64. 

purohita 25, 29, 30, 34 note 1 7, 
74, 7 S, 76, 77, S6. 
pustikarma 80. 
pugayajniya 73. Cp. grama'’, 
patudru'tree 

purva-brahmana loi, 104,107. 
pl-snipari;il-plant 62. 
pjrsni-sava 78, 

Pedu 81. 

PaitbTnasi, author of a smrti 
17; of a srdddliakalpa iS, 
21 note 22. 

Paithinasi Mausaliputra 18. 
Paidva 81. 

Paippalada, Paippaldda-sakha 
II, 13, 14, 15,40,103,105, 
106, 108, no, 113 note 6, 
X19, 122. 

paippaliida-mantrah 12, 17,40 
note 4. 

Paippalada*sraddhakalpa 12. 
paunahsila madhumantha 78. 
paustika 8. Cp. pustikarma. 
Pra9ava-(Pranou)Upani.5ad 19, 
24, 102, 105, 106, 108. 
prati, characteristic of'coun- 
ler-witchcraft’ 68, 69 note d, j 
pratipras 73. j 

pratiradha 99. , 

Pratrclna == Bfliaspati 9. 
pratyihgirasa =: pratyabhi- i 
carapa 8, 66, 68. I 

pratrSsa ajya 93. j 

pravara 1 16. I 

pravargya 119, 
pravalhikah 98. 

Pracinayogya 114. 
prajapatya-hymns 38, 94. 
Prana-hymn 88. 
pratah*savana 12 1. 
Prati^akhya: see, Atharva- 
Pi^tisakhya. 

prayascitta 4, 83, 103, 104, 
106, 114, 117. 
pras 73. 

prasitra-food, and -legend 
103, 118. 

Priyamedha Bharadvaja 114. 
Predi(Proti)Kau4ambeya Kau- 
suravindu 115. 

Barhi Ahgirasa 103, 118. 
balasa 60. 

Bfhatsarvanukramanika ofA V. 
20. Cp, Anukramanl, and 
Sarvanu . 


iSi 


Bfhaspati, prototype of puro- 
hita 34 note 17, 74, 75; 
Ahgirasa 9, 117, 118. Cp. 
Brahmanaspati. 
brahma, religion as a whole, 
30, 86; in relation to the 
sun 89. 

brahmagavl 79 note 8. 
brahmacarin, duties of 106, 
lio; hymn to 89. 
Brahmanaspati, prototype of 
purohita 75. Cp. Brhaspaii. 
brahman-priest, universal the- 
ologian and fourth priest 
at srauta-sacrifices 10, 29, 
30, 32, 105, 108, 112, 113, 
1 16, 119; in relation to 
purohita 32 ff. 

Brahmavada 13. 
brahmavarcasa 79 note 2I. 
Brahma- Veda i, 9, 10, 24, 31, 
73, 86, 107, 1 1 2, n6. Cp. 
sarvavidya. 

brahmodya, and brahmodya- 
hymns 88, 98, loo, 113, 

H5, 1 17. 

brahmaudana 7$, 87,90, 112. 
Brahma^dcchamsin 96. 
brahmanoktam, a ccremonv 

64. 

Bhaga 71. 

Bhadra, commentator of Kau- 
sika 16. / 


‘ Manskunder* (manya and 
skandhya), a disease 59. 
Mahabhasya, passage from in 
GB. 109. 

mahavrata-days 115, 
mahasanti 15 note 20. 
Mathara 13. 
matrkalpika lo. 
madhyamdina-savana 92, 1 2E. 
Mara 105, no. 
mitravinda 72. 

mulakarman, mulakriya 26, 
65. Cp. roots, 
mulakrt, mfilin 68, 82. 
mrgara-hymns 38, 51, S2; 

mrgara-vrata 83 note 23. 
me.sasrhgl, a plant 62. 
mohana 76 note ii. 

Mauda, Maudayana 12, 13. 
Maudgalya no. 

Mausalrputra (Paithinasi) 18. 

yak.sma 60. 

yajhakrama 102, 104, 106, 1 16, 
117, 119. 

yajnapraiyascilta-sutra, append- 
ix ofVaitana 16, 86 note 1 1 , 
ya^o havih 93. 
yatu, yatuvidah I, 8, 9, 23. 
yatudhana 26. 
yatuvidya 61, 65. 

Yaska 17. 

Yuvan Kausika 13. 


* Bharadvija’s cleaver’, ah vmn 

67. 

Bhava and Sarva 52, 82. 
BhSgali 13. 

Bhargava 13. 

Bhisaj Atharvana S, 23. 
bhata havis 93. 
bhutechadah-stanzas 96, 99. 
Bhrgu, a mythic fire-priest i , 
9, 10,23; name of a teacher 
19; originofioy; designa- 
tion of AV. 9, 10. 
Bhj-gu-veda (bhyguvistara) 9, 
lo. 

Bhtgvangirasah i, 9, lo, 107, 
1 10, 1 1 ij 1 13. Cp. Atharvah- 
girasah, 

BlJgvaugiroYid 10, 104, no, 
119. Cp. Atharvahgirovid. 
bhc§aj5ni i, 8, 9, 10, 22, 23, 
58, 1 1 7. Cp. santa. 
bhai§ajya 58. 


raksas, charms against 62. 
raksovidya 61, 65. 
rathavahana havis 93. ' 

rahasya-texts 17. 
rajakarmani 73, 74i 86. Cp. 

royal rites, 
rajayaksma 60. 
rajasflya 74/ lOO. 

Ramakrsna, author ofSamskil- 
raganapati n. 

I ra§trasamvarga-hymns 76 note 

Rudra, commentator of Kau- 
^ika 16. 

Rebha (Agni) 97. 
raibhyah (sc. rcah) 97. 
rohita-hymns 38, 55, 87, 89. 
93- 

Rohita and Rohii.iI, symbols 
of king and queen 75. 


mahgalika-hymns (AV. book 
18) 38. 

madhusQkta 90, 
maxiasp9Lpa 84. 
manupravalha 101 note 15. 
Mandhatar Yauvaaibiva m. 
Manyu *wrath% as spirit of 
battle 75. 
manyusamana 72. 


laksapagranthfth 20. 
lakssmi, puiaya and pdpi 8$. 
lak§a-plaiit- 61. 

LamagSyana 114. 

varaijia-tree 62. 

Varnapatala 20. 
valaga 65, valagin (1^. 

Ta§a 78, 87, 90, 92. 

9* 



132 11. Litteratxjre and History, i b. Atharva-V ed a and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


va:§llvara:5a, vasilcara^iaman- 
trlh 70, 72. 
vasatkara 120. 

Vacaspati 79. 

Yac Viraj 89. 

Vac Sarasvati 77. 
vajapeya 74» Si, 123. 

Vavata mahisi 98. 

Vasudeva 17. 

Vicaria III, 112. 
VitSna-kalpa 17. 
vidradha 60. 

Vidkana-kalpa 8. Cp. Angi- 
rasa-kalpa. 

Viraj 89. 
visvajit 1 1 6. 
visavidya 61, 

visa^aka, ‘plant’, or ‘ horn’ 60. 
visErii 62. 

visasahi-hymn 38, 65, 945 
visasahi-vrata 95. 
visnvat 115, ii6. 
vistarin odana 78, 
vihavya-(vihavlya-)hymn 67, 
68, 69 note 22, 
vysakapi-hymn 100, 124. 
Vena 89. 

Vaitana-stltra 16, 17. 
Vaitayana 16, 86 note li. 
vyahftis in AV. 105, 107, 108, 
109 , 1 13, 119. 

vratya-book (book 15 of AV.) 
38, 91 note 15; vratya-sto- 
mab 94* 

^amyu Atharvana 8, 1 1 2. 
sakadhama 81. 
gataudana 78. 
iamtatlya^hymn 62. 
satnbhnmayobha-hymns 15 
note 20. 

Sarva 52, 82, 109, 
iastraka^^a 96, 100. 

Sakuna 85. 

sSnta, lanta-veda 8, 9, 62 note i , 
105, 116. Cp. bhesajani. 


Santi, wife of Atharvan 8. 
.Santikalpa 13, 17. 

§antyudaka 112. 

sala-sava 78. 

silpa, silpani 100, 123. 

Siva 90, 105. 

suno divyasya maho havis 
93* 

. Sepaharsaaa 62. 

^aunaka, Saunakin, Sannakiya 
, 12, 13, 19. 

Saunaka-(Shavank)Upanisad 
, 12, 20, 110. 

Saunaklya-sutra 14, 20 note 
IS* 

^yenayaga, ^yenejya 80. 
^raddha, ‘faith expressed in 
, works’ 77. 

Sraddha, personified X17. 
Sraddhakalpa 17 (bis), 21 note 
22. 

I sodaSin-sacrifice 122. 
§odaiopacarapuja 17. 

I samvatsara-pravalha loi note 
15- 

j samvanana 70, 72. 
samskara 69. 
Samskaraga^apati 11. 
Samhita-kalpa, and -vidhi 16, 

17. 

sattra I04, 115, 133. 
Sadasya-priest 1 15, 117. 

' Sanatkumara 24. 
samnati, samnati-homah 73, 
81. 

sapatnlbSdhana 70. 
,saptar§i9am havis 93. 
samSna havis 93. 
sarpavidyE, sarpa-veda6iy|lo8. 
sarpihuti 83 note 15, 
sarvavid, sarvavidyS 105, 116. 

I Cp. Brahma-Veda. 

I Sarvannkramanika I, Cp. Anii- 
kramainiT, and Brhatsarv'a'". 


salilSni sGktani 15 note 20, 93. 
sava, sava-hymns 78, 87, 90. 
savanas, three daily 34, 92, 
103, 106, 116. 

sahasradak.sina-sacrifiae 1 16. 
samsravya havis 8i, 93. 
sakamaSva-saman 122. 
sakamedha-rites 112. 
samgrSmikaijii sGktani 76 note 
II. 

samtapana-fire 11 2. 
sSmaghosa 117 note 10. 
sEmmanasyani 72. 
sSvikah sambharSh 78. 
sSvitra pasu 116. 
sSvitri: see, gSyatri, 
silaci-plant 61. 
slmantakarma 7 1, 
subhesaja lo. 

Suinantu 25. 

suryS-sGkta (book 14 of AV.) 

38, 69, 88, 94. 
senastambhana 76 note il. 
Somaditya, author of the 
Aksepa, commentary of Vai- 
tana 16. 

sosyantikarma 71. 
sautramai)! 74, 93 note 3, 123. 
saumyah (sc. rcah) 122. 
Skandayiiga 17, 20 note 13. 
Skambha-hymns 3, 88. 
stomabhaga-legend 104; -man- 
tras 1 1 9. 

Stauda, Staudayana 12 
strlkarmSm 69. 
sraktya-tree, srakiya-amulet 
68 * 

SvaraiSstra 20. 
svargaudana 78. 

Svaidayana i^aunaka 113. 

havis, havis-hymns 67, 69 
3:iote 17, 93. 
hirapyagarbha-hymn 88. 
hrdya, hrdayasya bandhanah 

70, 72.* 



II. GENERAL INDEX. 


Aboriginal barbarism, influ- 
ence upon the Veda S. 

adaptation of hymns and 
stanzas 49, 50, 57. 

Alberuni on AV. 4> 10, 28 
note 3, 95. 

allopathy, allopathic symbo- 
lism 60. 

amulets, general character of 
59; bestow and protect life 
64; various kinds 53, 62, 
64, 66, 67. 

anatomy, knowledge of in A.V. 
4* 

ants 60, 61. 

Apastamba-srautasQtra, rela- 
tion of to AV. 45. 

‘appeaser of wrath’ 72. 

arrangement of the hymns of 
AV. 34, 3 ^^ 38 - 

assembly, charms to secure 
influence in 72. 

Atharvan-hymns, arrangement ' 
and division of 34, 36, 38 ; 
classification of 57; number 
57; grouped according 
to subject-matter 38 ; group- 
ed on account of verbal 
correspondences 39. 

Atharvan literature, brief 
sketch of I5if. 

Atharvan redaction, chrono- 
logy of 2, 3. 

Atharva-veda, names of l, 7 ; 
books-number of34 ; borrow- 
ed material in 44; commen- 
tary of 40; contempt of 3 ; 
contents ofS7 ; designations 
of 1, 7; editions of 40; 
verse-beginnings of 40; 
liistorical character of 5, 6 ; 
index verborum of 40 ; 
metres of 40; position of 
in Hindu literature 21 ; in 
AV. itself 22; text-histori- 
cal treatises of 20 ; trans- 
lations of 57 note; schools 
of I iff.; relation to, other 
collections 44. Cp. Sauna- 
klya-version. 


‘attractio similium’ 60, 63, 
note 14. 

avarice, conjuration against 77. 
Avesta, supposed to mention 
AV. 5 not e 8 ; haoina-wor- 
ship in 2. 

barley and water, curative 62. 
battle-charms, l3attle-de vices 
75- 

bdellium 62. 

beans, used in sorcery 66, 69 
note 14. 

birds ominous, charms against 

8s- 

bleeding 61. 

books ofAV., number of 34; 
arrangement and subdivi- 
sions of 35 ff. ; first seven 35 ; 
eight to eighteen 37 ; thir- 
teen to eighteen 93 ff. ; 
twentieth book 95. 
borrowed material in AV. 
44- 

Brahmans, claims and pre- 
tensions of 3, 76 ff.; gifts 
to 78; high character of 
79; inviolability of 76, 77, 
87; prayers and impreca- 
tions in behalf of 7, 76; 
social condition of 76 ; 
poverty of 77; noblesse 
oblige of 79. 

Brahmana-texts, their relation 
to AV. 3. 

Buddhistic literature, referen- 
ces to AV. 27. 

calumny, charm against $4, 
cattle, marking of 81. 
cattle-cha^s 80. 
cattle-slaughter, expiation of 

8s- 

caste in AV. 4. 
charades 98 — 100. 
chronology of Atharvan re- 
daction 2, 3; of popular 
and hieratic language 2, 3, 
46. 

classification of AV. hymns 

I 57 . , 


‘cleaver of Bharadvaja’, a 
hymn 67, 
colic 60. 

commentary on AV'. 40 ; com- 
mentaries on Vaitana-sutra 
and Kau^ika-sutra 16. 
composite hymns 37, 43. 
concatenation of stanzas 43, 
44 note 15. 

conflict of sacrifices 67 ff., 
114 note 7. 

consecration of kings 74, Cp. 

rajasiiya. 
constipation 60- 
contempt of AV. 3. 
contents of AV. 57. 
cosmogonic hymns 86. 
cosmogonies, Atliarvanic 107, 
109, 117. 

counter-witchcraft 68. 
cow and calf, charm to se- 
cure mutual attachment of 
81. 

cow of Brahman, inviolable 
77 - 

danger, charms to obviate it 
80, 8i. 

deaths, 100 or more varieties 
of 64. 

debate, success in 72, 73. 
debts, burden the conscience 

84- 

defilement, charms against 

S3- 

demons, charms against 02, 
65 ; designations of 66, 68. 
designations of AV. i, 7. 
Dharma-texts, relation of to 
AV. 3, 25. 

dialectic differences contrast- 
ed with chronological differ- 
ences 2, 46. 
didactic stanzas 98. 
diseases, account of 59 ff. ; 

transference of 62. 
dissension in family etc. 72. 
i divine eagle 80, 82. 
j divisions of AV. 34, 36, 38. 
i dogs heavenly 60, 93; dog- 
j sacrifice 68. 



134 Liri’ERATURE AND HjSTQKY. I R. AtIIARVA-VeDA AND GOPATH A-BrAHMANA. 


dreams, evil 83, 85. 
dropsy 60. 

Earth, hymn to 90. 
ealinj; alone, expiation of 
85. 

editions of AV. 40. 
effifjics used in witchcraft 66, 
68, 68 note 4. 

eighth to eighteenth book of 

AV. 37. 

eighteenth book of AV. 95. 
election of kings 74. 
elephant, symbol of royalty 
74» 

evil bodily characteristics, 
charms against 71. 
evil dreams S3, 85. 
exiled king, charm to restore 
him 74. 

expiation for gifts received 

79. 84. 

expiatory hymns, stanzas, and 
formulas 34, 38, ’ 83, 84, 
III; chronological signifi- 
cance of 4, 
eye, diseases of 61. 

family strife, charms against 
72. 

‘Father time* 89. 
fifteenth book of AV. 94. 
fire, charms against 80. 
fire-scrvice contrasted with 
soma-service i, 2. 
first to seventh book of AV. 
35 - 

five Vedas (!) 105, 108, u6. 
four Vedas, posited, defended, 
and illustrated 40 note 30, 
104, 105, no, 112, 1 1 3, 
114, IIS, 116, 117. 
fourteenth book of AV. 94. 
frog, against fire 80 ; symbol 
of rain 80; against fever 
63 note 5* 

funeral-hymns and stanzas 1 5, 
95 ; chronology of 2 ; funeral- 
practices 77. 

gambling-charms 81 ; -debts 
84. 

geographical data in AV. 4, 
gifts, expiation for receipt of 
79 . 84- 

girdle, sacred 64. 
goat, as gift to Brahmans 
78. 

Gopatha-brahmana 16, loi C; 
contents of 107; pttrva- 
brahma^a of 104, 107; 
nttara-brahmanaof 102, 117 ; 
correspondence of with 
Jaiminlya-brahmana 117; 
with Vedic texts in general 


' 103, 104; secondary cha- 

racter of 102. 

grain,.charms to secure abund- 
ance of 80. 

grammatical treatises, belong- 
ing to AV. 20; contain 
references to AV. 27 ; gram- 
matical matters in Gopatba- 
brahmaiia 105, 109. 

Gj-hya-sfitras, character of and 
relation to AV. 5, 6, 24, 

grouping of hymns, according 
to subject-matter 38; on 
account of verbal corres- 
pondences 39, 

‘Grudge* (Arilti), name of a 
demon 77. 

hair, charms to cause its 
growth 61. 

baoma-worship in A vesta 2. 

harmony, charms to secure it 
7. 72. 

health, charms to procure it 
81. 

hemiplegia 60. 

hieratic language and religion 
contrasted with popular 2, 

46* 

Hindu literature, its estimate 
of AV. 21. 

historical character of AV. 

5 . 6 . 

‘holy water* il2. 

holy wood, ten kinds of 62. 

hoiwcopathy 60, 63 note 14. 

horse, charm to make it swift 
81. 

hospitality, rites of in RV. 7 
note 2. 

house, moved when given 
as a gift to Brahmans 
78. 

house-building So. | 

hundred years, ideal length 
of life 64. 

husband, charms to obtain 
one 71. 

imprecations, against demons 
etc. 65 ff.; against oppres- 
sors of Brahmans 77 j against 
rivals 70. 

index verborum of AV. 40 ; 
index of pratikas 40. 

Jaiminlya-brahmana, corres- 
pondence of with AV. 45; 
with GB. 117* 

Jaina-literature, its view of 
AV. 27. 

journey, charm to ensure its 
safety 81. 


Kalpas of AV-, live 13, 16. 
Kausika-sutra described i6, 
17; its relation to AV. 
57- 

kings, their election, con- 
secralion, or exile 74. Cp. 
royal rites. 

Ksatriyas, their relation to 
AV. 10, 73. 

language of AV., chronology 
of 45; i elation to th.at of 
KV. 45, 47 ; to the classical 
’ dialect 45. 

law-books, relation of to AV. 

: 3 . 25. 

lead, used in sorcery 66. 
leprosy 60. 

lightning, protection against 
80. 

lion, symbol of royalty 74. 
literature of AV., brief sketch 
of ISIT. 

liturgic terms in AV. 93 
note 3. 

long life, charms to secure it 
62, 63. 

lost property, charms to find 
it Si. 

love charms 70, 71. 

Mahnbharata, relation of to 
AV. 26. 

mania 83 charms to cure it 
62. 

marking of cattle 81. 
medicine and medical charms 
in AV. 7, 57, 58; chrono- 
logy of 59 ; symbolic treat- 
ment of 59 ff.; in classical 
I Sanskrit 63 note lo. 
merchant’s prayer 81. 
metres of AV. I, 41 ; critical 
restoration of 42. 
miscarriage, charm to prevent 
it 71; 

mishap and misfortune>charms 
to prevent them 83* 
moon, phases of 82; in cos- 
mic relation with AV, 40 
note 30, 51, 107, 108, 112, 
114, 116. 

mourning-women 95. 
mustard, against ophthalmia 
6u 

names of AV. I, 7. 
new-moon and full-moon 
offerings 113, 117, 
new-year’s festival 82* 

Night, hymns to 82. 
nightmare 83, 85. 

Nirukta, relation of to AV. 
45- 

nobliissc oblige of Brahmans 
79 - 




ii. Genkrai- Index. 


135 


niunbcr of hymns in AV. i, 
57- 

obscenity in AV. 98,99,100. 
omens and portents 17, 83. 

Cp. adbluitani. 
ophthalmia 61. 
oppression of Brahmans 76, 

77, 94. 

order of Atharvan stanzas as 
critical help 43. 

Paippalada-vcrsion of AV., 
description of 14, 15; ex- 
tract from in the Kathaka 
Rcaka 14. 
panaceas 62. 

pantheon, Vedic in AV. 3, 
90. 

panther, symbol of royalty 

74. 

Pariiistas of AV. described 

16. 

Parsis, ‘Vedas’ of S. 
pearl and its shell as amulets 
64. 

pepper as a cure for wounds 
61. 

Persian translation of AV. 58 ; 

of Upanifads 19, 108. 
personal cliaracteristics, good 
and evil 72 note 10, 85. 
philtres 70. 

‘piss-ants’ 60, 61. 
ploughing-charm So. 
ploughshare-amulet 67. 
poison, charms against 61, 1 

popular religion contrasted ! 

with hieratic religion 2. 
porridge as gift to Brahmans 

78. 

purificatory charms 84. 
Purohita,* his relation to AV. 
25* 29, 30, 74; to Brhas- 
pati 34 note 175 to royalty 
74. 75* 

Pftrva-brfthma^a of Gopatha- 
brahma^a 101 ff., 104; con- 
tents of 107, 

prayaicitta-literature in AV, 
4. 83. 

prose parts of AV 1, 5 note i, 

41- 

prosperity, charms to obtain 
it 80, 81. 

rain, charms to secure it 80. 
religious matters, neglect of 
84. 

riddles 98 — 100. 

Kig-veda, its relation to AV. 
2, 21, 45, 

ritualistic hymns 3;, 91. 
ritual texts of AV,, their 
attitude towartls the AV. 
28, 29. 


rivals, charms against 69, 70. 
river, charm to conduct it 
into a new channel 80. 
roots of plants, sorcery with 
26, 27, 52, 65, 68, 68note4, 
82. 

royal rites and charms 7, 17, 
33, 73n'. 

sacrifices, conflict of 67 ff., 
*114 note 7; imperfections 
in 84, 103, 104, io6, 108, 
119. 

salve, amulet of 62, 64. 
Saina-veda, relation of to AV. 
45* 

Sanskrit literature, its esti- 
mate of AV. 27. 
Saunaklya-version ofAV. de- 
scription of 13» ‘15; its 
padapatha dcscrilied 16; 
its commentary 16; its re- 
daction 34 ff. Cp. Atharva- 
veda. 

schools of AV. 1 1 if, ; di.scri- 
minated against in the Pari- 
si|tas 30. 

seed, blessing of 80, 
serpent, symbol of royalty 
74 j serpents, charms against 
61, 81. 

sesame in sorcery-practices 
26, 69 note 14. 
seventeenth book of AV. 94. 
Cp. viiasahi. 

shepherd’s charm against wild | 
beasts St. 

sin, Hindu conception of 83 ; 

sins of the gods 83, 85. 
sixteenth book of AV. 94. 
sleeping -charm 70. 

I soma-service, contrasted with 
fire-service i, 2. 
sorcery-practices 66 ; native 
literature of 66; undertaken 
with theosophic hymns 3, 
86, 89 ; with an ethical 
hymn 87, 
sores, cure of 6i. 
spells, planted in all sorts of 
objects 68. Cp. kftya. 
srauta-practices in AV, 4, 33, 
«4. 91, 92, 93 note 3. 
sraula-priests, 16 in ntimlier 
115; 17 or 21 in number 
117. 

5rauia-texts, their estimate of 
AV. 22.' 

stanzas, number of in AV. I. 
sterility, charm against 71. 
stray cattle, charm to bring 
it back 81. 

sun ill relation to brahma 

89. 

superior readings in AV. a.s 
compared with RV. 49 J 


as compared with Yajur- 
veda 56. 

symbolic treatment of disease 

59 ff. 

Tailtfriya-brahmana, its rela- 
tion to AV. 45. 
teachers, list of Atharvanic 
13 - 

teeth, first pair of in children 
71- 

tetrads, Atharvanic ; see, four 
Vedas. 

text-historical treatises of AV. 
20. 

theosophic hymns 2, 3 , 4 , 86 ; 
list of in Culika-upaiiisad 
90 note I. 

thirteenth book of AV. 87, 
93- 

tiger, tiger-skin, symbol of 
royalty 74. 

Time as a theosophic con- 
cept 89. 

Iran.sferencc of disease 62. 
translations of AV. 57 note- 
truant woman, charm to bring 
her back 70. 
tumors 61. 

twentieth book of AV. 91,95, 
96, JOO. 

twenty, number of Atharvan 
books 34, 107. 
twin-ealves, expiation of the 
birth of 77. 

unlucky star, chihl born under 
71. 

Upanisads in general, their 
relation to AV. 24; Upani- 
sads of the AV. 18 — 20; 
lJpani.s.ad-malerial in Go- 
patha-l)r5hmana I9, 104, 

107, 108, 110. 

urine, retention of 60; urin- 
ating, expiation of 84. 
Uttara-brahmai>a of Gopatha- 
brahmaria lo i ; secondary 
character of 102 ; contents 
of 117. 

Vaitaua-sutra, described i6, 

1 7 ; relation of to Gopatha- 
brahmana I02. 

Various readings of AY. and 
RV. 47; of AV. and Yajur- 
ve<la 53 ; of AV. and Srauta- 
sutras 55, 

Varuna and Atharvan, dia- 
logue between 77. 

Vedas: see, four Vedas, and, 
five Vedas, 

Vedic learning, prayers to 
obtain it 79. 
venereal disease 63. 


1 36 IL Litter ATURE and History, i b. Atharva-Veda and Gopatha-Brahmana. 


vermin in tlie field, exorcism 
of 80. 

village-politics 7> 73* 
virility, charms to produce it 
62 ; charms to deprive men 
men of it 7^* 

war-charms 75. 
water, as gift to Brahmans 
79; as a cure of disease 
62 ; %vaters and moon in 
cosmic relation with AV. 


40 note 30, 51, 107, 108, 
1 12, 114, 1 16. 

water-plants, used against fire 

80. 

wealth, charms to procure it 

81. 

weather-charm, weather-pro- 
phet 8r. 

wedding-charms 69, 7 1 ; chro- 
nology of 2. 

wedding-hymns of AV. 94. 
t Cp. strya-siikta. 


wisdom, rile to procure it 

79 - 

witchcraft: see, sorcery, 
ivomen, charms pertaining to 

7. 69/ 

worms, charms against 61. 
wounds, cure of 6t. 

younger brother’s pi'ecedence, 
expiation of 85. 

zoographic data in AV. 4, 


