SAW. GANESAN 
KARAIKUDI. S. I. R- 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE 


IN 


INDIA AND ABROAD 


FRONTISPIECE 


SAW: GANESAN 
KARAIKUDI. S Is Re 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE 


IN 


INDIA AND ABROAD 


BY 
PRASANNA KUMAR ACHARYA, LESS. 


M.A. (CAL.), PH-D. (LEYDEN), D.LIT. (LonDON) 
HEAD OF THE ORIENTAL DEPARTMENTS 
PROFESSOR OF SANSKRIT, UNIVERSITY 
OF ALLAHABAD 


MANASARA SERIES: VOLUME VI 


PUBLISHED BY THE OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 
LONDON, NEW YORK, BOMBAY 
CALCUTTA, MADRAS 
CHINA, JAPAN 


SAW. GANESAN 
KARAIKUDI. S. I. R. 


‘What the learned world demand 
of us in India is to be quite 
certain of our data, to place the 
monumental record before them 
exactly as it now exists, and to in- 
terpret it faithfully and literally.’ 


SAW: GANESAN 
KARAIKUDI, & Is Rad 


MANASARA SERIES 


Votume I—A Dictionary of Hindu Architecture (1927). 


Votume II—Indian Architecture according to Ménasara Silpa- 
Sastra (1927). 


Votume I1I—Ménasara—Sanskrit Text with Critical Notes (1934). 


Votume IV—Architecture of Mdénasdra—Translation in English 
(1934). 


Votume V—Architecture of Manasdra—Plates 1-cxxxv (Architec- 
tural), cxxxvi-civum (Sculptural) (1934). 


VotumeE VI—Hindu Architecture in India and Abroad (1946). 
Votume VII—An Encyclopaedia of Hindu Architecture (1946). 


SAW, GANESAN 
PREFACE KARAIKUDI. S. I. R. 


In this volume an endeavour has been made to give a brief survey 

of Hindu Architecture in India and Abroad. Materials are, however, 

not yet quite sufficient to attempt a full and complete history of the 

building activities of the Hindus in India itself. Architecture, in 

ancient India, was understood in a comprchensive sense, and included 

sculpture and a variety of other arts. In the preliminary section of 

the Manasdara the ancient authorities themselves discussed the allied 

subjects. In the Introductory chapter of this volume a short account 

is given of what was understood as fine arts. Many of the fine arts are 

intimately connected with architecture. Thus a full history of Hindu 

architecture will be incomplete without a complete survey of all the 

allied arts. Besides, Hindu architecture was cultivated with success 

not only in its homeland and in its neighbouring countries, but also 

in far off colonies and apparently disconnected and distant countries. 

It has been now admitted by competent authorities that the Maya 

civilization of Central America spread from India, the motherland of 
the Maya clans, who, in the times of the great Epics, were known as 

Danavas or opponents of Aryan invaders of India. Great explorers 

like Sir Aurel Stein have unearthed various Hindu monuments 
over an extensive area in Central Asia, which has been significantly 
designated as Serindia in order to keep its home connexion with 
India alive, especially in the matter of architecture, both Buddhist 
and Hindu. Numerous savants, especially French and Dutch 
scholars, have published particulars, with minute details, of Hindu 
and Buddhist monuments of colossal character in numerous 
island countries of the Indian Ocean and the inlands connected 
therewith. This extensive area, also, has been significantly desig- 
nated as Insulindia for the same purpose of keeping fresh 
in the memory its home connexion with India. In the homeland 
itself the astonishing archaeological survey of General Sir A. Cun- 
ningham opened out an endless store of architectural materials 
of the Buddhist and later periods. The wonderful discoveries, at 
first of Mr. R. D. Banerji and, later, of Sir John Marshall and his 
colleagues, made especially at Mohenjo-daro and Harappa, have 


1x 


REFACE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 
Pp 


out an unexpected netherland, with its awe-inspiring cities 
and monuments which are stated to point to an Indian ees 
of the pre-Vedic age, beyond 3000 B.C. These undreamed of iscoveries 
have rendered quite stale the vigorous and learned controversy 
between Raja Rajendralal Mitra and James Fergusson regarding the 
architectural achievements of Vedic Indians, more specifically the 
question if the Indians of 2000 to 1000 B.c. knew the manufacture and 
use of burnt bricks. Convincing references are, however, available not 
only to burnt bricks and carved stones, but also to the storeyed man- 
sions with a hundred doors and a thousand pillars which are described 
in the Vedic literature, and, subsequently, elaborated in the Buddhist 
scriptures and the Hindu Epics, Purdnas, Agamas and numerous 
other branches of Sanskrit literature. One of the fortunate results 
of this controversy has been, however, the publication of valuable 
books, especially of Fergusson’s History of Indian and Eastern 
Architecture, containing life-like references to our architectural 
monuments of Buddhist and later periods. His noble example has 
been followed with greater zeal and clearer understanding by 
genuine friends of Indian culture like the late lamented E. B. Havell, 
Vincent A. Smith, and several others whose sacred memory deserves 
our respect, but who are too numerous to be quoted here. All these 
savants, however, had to restrict their researches to the trodden 
paths, which they enormously cleared, though they could explore no 
new avenue. Thus the period between 3000 B.c. and 500 B.c. remained 
practically unrepresented, so far as archaeological remains are 
concerned. This gap could only be filled by those vivid descriptions 
which can be gathered together from literature. The reality of 
non-technical literary and casual references has, however, been 
reasonably substantiated by the publication of the Manasara series. 
The treatises on Silpa-Sastra were till very recently known only from 
casual references. The stores of manuscripts on the subject of archi- 
tecture and other arts were practically closed for a long time. The 
publication of the Manasara, the leading and standard work on the 
subject, has made it possible to fill to a certain extent the gaps left 
— by the explorers, archaeologists, and historians. 
es of information generally indicated 
above. Parts of Chapters II, III, IV. V VI, and : 
in the writer’s Indian Ahi IAS aS at VL vars inoluded 
uecture according to Manasara Silpa-Sastra, 
x 


brought 


INDIA AND ABROAD PREFACE 


which was first published in 1927, but that edition was sold out in 
less than a year’s time. The Government of the United Provinces 
accepted the proposal of bringing out a second edition, but preferred 
the scheme of the present volume, and consented to the change of the 
former title and the inclusion of illustrative drawings and photographs. 
The late lamented Mr. H. R. Harrop, the then Director of Public 
Instruction of the United Provinces Government, induced the writer 
to go much further and undertake the construction of a residential 
house in accordance with the rules and methods of the Silpa-Sastras, 
with such adaptations as would not violate the principles of Hindu architec- 
ture, but, at the same time, would satisfy present-day requirements. 
This volume opens with an account of the pre-Vedic architecture 
of 3000 8B.c., which is based entirely on the Mohenjo-daro dis- 
coveries, and my grateful acknowledgment is due to Sir John Marshall 
and his co-workers. An endeavour has been then made to give a 
picture of the Vedic architecture such as could be drawn from copiou 
literary references and inferred from the Mohenjo-daro finds of the 
preceding period, and corroborated by what happened in the 
succeeding classical period. The earlier part of this classical period, 
terminating roughly at the Christian era, depends also on literary 
references. But these literary references are different from and more 
substantial than those of the Vedic period. The accounts gathered 
from the Buddhist scriptures and the great Epics, the Agamas and. the 
Puranas, are, at many places, a technical description of the subjects. 
Moreover, from about the fifth century before Christ, architectural 
remains are available to supplement and to substantiate the vivid 
literary descriptions of the various types of monuments of purely 
Buddhist, Jain, and Brahmanical groups. This realistic background 
of Hindu architecture in its homeland is brought face to face with 
the pictures given in the avowedly architectural texts, which are 
unquestionably intended to serve as guide books to the practical 
builders and the professionals. 

This brief survey of Hindu architecture in India itself may enable 
the reader to follow the natural course of its migration, not only to 
the border lands, but also into what is known as Serindia and Insulindia, 
and, to a certain extent, to China, Japan, and even Central America. 
The account of the Central Asian Hindu architecture is largely based 
on the Serindian explorations of Sir Aurel Stein, to whom the indebted- 
ness of the writer is gratefully acknowledged. Insulindia comprises 


x1 


PREFACE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


a much larger area, and contains in its wonderful island stores numer- 
ous colossal Hindu and Buddhist monuments which were necessarily 
erected because of their aesthetic and scientific merits, and because 
the builders and the rulers who colonized those islands went from 
India and were lovers of Indian arts. The accounts of such varied 
types and of such long duration had to be gathered from various 
sources, which have been specified in the footnotes for reference and 
for an expression of my gratitude. My grateful acknowledgment is, 
however, recorded here, also, to James Fergusson for the help received 
from his drawings and woodcuts in his History of Indian and Eastern 
Architecture, and to Dr. R. C. Mazumdar and other scholars who 
recently contributed to the Greater India series. While the influence 
of Hindu culture on Chinese and Japanese civilizations is generally 
known and acknowledged, it would be news to many that the 
Yucatan Peninsula, in the Mexican territory of Central America, 
contains some Hindu monuments. The Maya manuscript book records 
the migration to America of the clans whose chief, Maya, is stated in 
the great Indian Epic to have built a wonderful audience hall for the 
King Yudhishthira. The British Museum Guide to the Maudsley Collection 
of Maya Sculptures further confirms the building activities of Maya 
clans in America. But the credit is due to Dr. Gann and Professor 
Morley for the first discovery of the great city of Coba and the famous 
monolith of Asokan type in the once populous site of the forests of 
Yucatan. The Mayas also erected magnificent temples and palaces, 
no doubt after Hindu originals, through the prototypes of Java. The 
conclusion of Professor Elliot Smith, of University College, London, 
which is gratefully reiterated here, is that ‘the Maya civilization of 
Central America was directly derived from India.’ 

In Appendix I, an endeavour has been made to remove an 
erroneous notion that Hindu architecture was based on, or, at 
least, largely influenced by, the Persian architecture. The Persian 
had no temples, nor images, nor idols, while the glories of Hindu 
architecture are evinced nowhere more than in temples and sculp- 
tures. In Appendix II, a further endeavour has been made to remove 
a similar deceptive notion. Taking advantage of our present national 
awakening, certain time-servers and fortune-seekers have gone to 
the length of misleading even some big municipal corporations in 
matters of the so-called Indian style, which they enforced by 
legislation in certain quarters of their cities. This has also affected 


xu 


INDIA AND ABROAD PREFACE 


some truly patriotic builders, who have been persuaded to believe 
that their mission towards Hindu or Indian architecture will be 
fulfilled if they can discard everything European, especially English, 
and if they place a GaneSa image or an elephant figure at the Jand- 
ing of their dwellings, a monkey on their school buildings, and a 
hawk symbol upon their hospitals. This leads to the more import- 
ant question of ascertaining the future of Indian architecture. 
Appendix III contains extracts from various shades of opinion 
which command respect and will help the solution of such a serious 
question. These observations are primarily on the Manasara archi 
tecture. ‘ Forms of ancient architecture’ as supplied by the Manasara 
series, interested Dr. Rabindranath Tagore ‘in a real. human way.’ 
Dr. Sir C. Y. Chintamani shared the view that ‘our architectural 
policy of the past few hundred years, based on foreign imitation, has 
not proved successful, and that a trial may be given to our ancient 
methods and principles.’ It is of particular interest to Professor Keith 
to see whether ‘the true doctrines of the ancient Hindu authorities 
made available by the Manasdra series can be turned to practical 
benefit for India and for its people,’ and he looks forward to see ‘a 
house built after the Mdanasdra which may demonstrate that modern 
India has something to learn from the achievements of its past.’ 
Mr. Hargreaves recommends to Indian architects ‘to examine 
to what extent the principles laid down in the Mdnasdara represent 
those of medieval Hindu architecture and art and to consider if they 
are suitable for modern practice.’ Dr. Jha and Mr. Chatterjee are 
more than convinced about the practicability of the Mdnasara prin 
ciples of architecture. The former believes in ‘ the practical outcome 
of the experience of centuries, which is likely to be more adapted 
to the climatic conditions of the country than the ideas derived 
from experience in other climes and other countries, and which was 
likely to be extremely useful to the extensive town- and village- 
planning that was going to be undertaken in Bihar’ after the disastrous 
earthquake, incidentally, but, for which, a wholesale trial of ancient 
methods is impracticable. Mr. Ramananda Chatterjee, after citing the 
examples of ‘old Nepal temples which have withstood the earthquake 
shocks more than modern buildings,’ appeals not so much to the Prov. 
incial Governments or the national leaders as to one’s commonsense | 
to the effect that a trial must be given to the elaborate and practical 
handbook of Mdnasdra, which ‘embodies the age-long experience 


XU) 


PREFACE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


of many experts native to the soil and climate, and that to dismiss 
it without such trial is to insult ourselves as well as our ancestors.’ + 

Such exhortations naturally tempted the writer himself to make 
a trial, as no one else would be so anxious to see the actual result of hig 
life-long researches. Thus at first a couple of tiny temples have been 
attempted with very great success. They are, however, erected in an 
jut-of-the-way place, in his native village, Yajfia-sala, some five hundred 
miles east of Calcutta, in the Tippera District, East Bengal. One of 
these is a memorial Siva temple on the cremation grounds of his 
parents. It faces south on the eastern bank of a tank, to the east of 
which, at a distance of some 400 yards, runs a nameless ancient 
river. This river rises from the mountains between Burma and 
India and falls into the Bay of Bengal, making a semi-circle of 
Some two miles from north to south and a mile and a half towards 
the east from the temple. It is a very simple structure, 10 feet 
6 inches long, 8 feet broad, and 12 feet high. It faces an eight 
feet high Nandi pillar and contains a phallus of Siva, so carved 
by a sculptor in Benares as to symbolize the Ardha-Narisvara 
image. In a town it can be built at a cost of less than Rs.500. 

The other is a Vaishnava type of temple containing the images of 
the family deities, Lakshmi-Govinda and Raja-Rajeévara Narayana. 
It is situated at some 400 yards to the west of the Siva temple and is 
separated from the tank by a rectangular garden, 100 yards by 150 
yards. It also faces the south, to which direction there are court- 
yard, garden, paddy-field, and the public road, east to west, to about 
1,000 yards off the temple. The main shrine, a square of 16 feet 
a side, has a 7 feet 8 inches high and 10 feet 6 inches broad stkhara 
(spherical dome) of the Mdnasdra pattern, rising above the roof 12 feet 
4.inches from above the plinth and 16 feet above the ground. It has 
a colonnaded 6 feet wide verandah on all four sides, which may serve 
as the path for circumambulation on rainy days, the regular pradak- 
shina path being beyond the plinth. The pillars are of the Mdnasara 
type. This structure (Plates Ia, Ib) can be built in a town at a cost 
of less than Rs.4,500, with marble floor throughout. 

These trial illustrations, being very much in an out-of-the-way 
place, are not likely to be scrutinized by many people. Besides, how- 
ever religious-minded we are reputed to be, the success of the modern 


1¥or further observations of a few more leaders of public thought, see Appendix 
III, pp. 422-449. 
xiv 


KARAIKUDI. S.I. R. 
PLATES I(a) anp 1(6) 


| | SAW. GA NESAN 
} 


Aa 
4 OE ak 
we ‘ S¢ 


oe Yy ae ep ee. | 
tor Piha ew 


Sah ig 
Se 


7 “4 ¥ 
, oe a 
63>". + ¢ ‘i 
. i 
J ~ 
2 - 
. es 
hee 
. . al 
>. ie OR Ge 
ns . a + 
pT BAAS 
; . 
he's 
a r JG * 
Can : 
i, 
P i 
cr eae. 
a hs 
: bare | 
PAs 
‘ 


at 
iia. Pat 
“es. Ff ae Oe 


i a 
eth ne 


i Or 


+ Oe 
fy 
Was 
bal cue 
7 


| 


Maru iLA® - J 
vl ew 


GES St asl hn 2 ee | 
3 e3 an FB le 
ae weit ct a: * Fit a Lae “i , 


% Oe 
St ek rk. a 


= een he: ‘ 
(Top) RAyrayesvara Temple (EAST SIDE VIEW) 


P - 
(Bottom) Laxsumi-GoyinpA TEMPLE (WEST SIDE ) Oe XIV 


INDIA AND ABROAD PREFACE 


architecture must be judged by dwelling-hou , 
ings as are more unawataplee Bee siete a ee 
with our worldly comfort and convenience, and wj y ne 
cae se » and with our town-life 
with its privileged amenities but having peculiar restrictio 
ae ns and 
requirements. Mr. Harrop, who, as the Director of Public Instruct} 
handled the publication of the Mdanasara fo fi ce ee 
he retired, was very much influenced by hi He ae Pag 
? Cua y his own reading of the texts 
as well as by the expert opinions, not only of scholars and leas 
of public thought, but also of artists, engineers, and laymen, to whose 
commonsense Mr. Ramananda Chatterjee so vigorously appealed. 
Thus, at his express suggestion and promise of some possible financial 
assistance from Government, who had already made a small profit, 
out of the sale-proceeds of the entire first edition, a bigger trial was 
undertaken in October, 1935. 

The object has been to demonstrate a residential design from the 
Manasara. The Svastika plan of storeyed mansions described in 
Chapter XXXV has been selected. The structure has been built 
upon a site which answers the primary requirements demanded in 
the texts, regarding the natural slope for drainage purposes, the 
wind direction for ventilation, and the sun’s course for a correct 
orientation of a dwelling-house in Allahabad. This Svastika Mansion 
is situated in a delta formed into a tableland by the three famous 
rivers, the Sarasvati, the Ganges, and the Yamuna, which no doubt 
once met below the Bharadvaj-Asrama, some two hundred yards to 
the north of the site. The Sarasvati has now altogether disappeared, 
leaving behind its trace by a big dry drain which forms the southern 
boundary line of the site, but her roaring eloquence can be heard 
and her reality felt for an hour or two after a heavy shower of 
rain. The Ganges and the Yamuna have been diverted, the former 
to some three miles north and the latter about two miles south of the 
site, by dykes built by the Moghals. They now meet below the Fort of 
Akbar, at a distance of some two miles. 

The site-plan (Plate I) will show the actual shape, size, and 
the surrounding views of the plot. The site commands a round 
frontage of six hundred and fifty-two feet, with a straight back of 
five hundred and eighty-seven feet, and has three road junctions on 
the circular part of the segment. At the east end of the segment 
Hamilton Road and Malaviya Road, coming from the south, and 


1 See Appendix ITI, pp. 422-449. 
XV 


PREFACE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 
another new unnamed road coming from the north-east, merge into 
the provincial road locally known as Fort Road. About the middle 
point of the segment, and just facing the front entrance and the porch- 
pillar, another new road meets the Fort Road, coming straight from 
the dyke of the Ganges and running as if into the house, and thus may 
fittingly be named after the Svastika Mansion by the Municipal 
authorities. At this junction, also, ends the three-mile long Thornhill 
Road, the best street in Allahabad : it issues from the Cantonment 
area and passes through the Civil Lines, having the famous Alfred 
Park on the right and Muir College grounds and towers on the left 
at a distance of some two furlongs from the Svastika Mansion. At the 
west end of the segment this road is crossed below the Bharadvaj 
Park by Lowther Road, which, at this junction, merging into the 
provincial road, connects the Ganges and the Yamuna. It runs from 
south to north and joins the East Indian Railway bridge on the 
Yamuna with the Curzon Bridge on the Ganges, and connects the 
city sides at two ends of the town. On the left of this important road 
stands the Government House Compound at a distance of some two 
furlongs, Bharadvaj-Asrama at less than two hundred yards, and 
University grounds and main buildings at six furlongs; on the right lie 
the Swaraj and Anand Bhawans at some three hundred yards north, 
Prayag railway station at the distance of a mile, and the Chatham 
Lines fields and open country-side at one and a half miles. On the 
opposite side of Thornhill Road, between the central and western 
road junctions, is a triangular open ground, with a small tin-shed for 
public shelter, which terminates at another road-junction some fifty 
yards from the site, made of Lowther Road, provincial road, and 
Kamla Nehru Hospital-and-Annie Besant School Road. 

The natural slope of the site is towards the south-east. Beneath 
the road-junction at this end of the segment the straight Sarasvati 
(drain) and the Fort Road drain meet at the road culvert and take 
away every drop of unwanted water and liquid refuse. The whole 
segment has been covered with boundary walls which demonstrate, 
in a modified form, the Buddhist railings of Sanchi and other 
places, really a variety of those referred to in the texts. The two 
main gates, specially made of wrought-iron to demonstrate an ancient 
design, are placed in a line with the eastern and western .extremities 
ofthe main house. The central road-junction at the middle part of 
the segment, which supplies the axis to the house, faces a three-part 
V1 


Qyose-UP FRON 
SRGMENTSHAY 


> View oF SVASTI 
apED PORCH. AND 


PLATE IV(a) 


KA Ve anmn t THE OcTrAGONAL TOWER, 
THE AMBHA (Main PorcH PILLAR) 


Page xy 


PLATE IV(b) 


| 
} 
H 
| 


i 
ii 


aE 


ul 
Tel 


PASS. Ee 


| 


A Distant Front VIEW SHOWING THE RAILINGS Page xvii 


INDIA AND ABROAD PREFACE 


Wicket-gate fitted. with two closed and one open iron gates of special 
ancient design. The western main gate has a half wicket-door for 
servants and traders. About halfway between this gate and western 
end of the segment there is another twelve feet wide iron gate 

leading straight to the porch to the east, and to the garage, stable 
and outhouses to the south on the Sarasvati (drain). 

The segment-shaped porch, a prototype of the site, coming out 
of the front portion of ah eight-sided tower, is supported by a 
single main pillar (grihastambha) erected after the Manasara design, 
on the axis of the house. This tower, fifty feet high, supplies the 
grand stair hall to answer for the reception room (rodana-griha) 
on the ground floor; the semi-circular gallery at the level of the 
porch-roof and first floor; and the segment-shaped tower hall at’ 
the roof-level of the first floor which serves the purpose of the family 
chapel internally, and, externally, an octagonal dome with two slightly 
rounded sides. The chapel has a colonnaded balcony in the straight 
front side, wherefrom the Ganges waters are visible when the river 
is full, At the back of it is a hexagonal boudoir, with one convex 
side, which serves as the shed over the grand staircase, and its doors 

.at right and left open out to the roofs of the first floor rooms and 
of the slightly lowered back balconies. These roofs serve as terraces 
to the chapel and the boudoir. The boudoir has a corresponding 
hexagonal parlour. on the ground floor. Both these rooms jointly 
form five sides af the octagonal tower, which has one flat side in 
front and two round sides on right and lefi. The tower has two 
wings on right and left, the single-pillared porch in the shape of the 
site in front, the hexagonal inner courtyard! at the back, the 
single-storeyed kitchen block and guest-rooms on the two back 


1This irregular-sided courtyard is intended to represent the prescribed 
unsymmetric figure of the Spirit of the house ( Vastu-purusha) lying on its face. His 
five principal limbs are represented by the five set of staircases ascending from 
the ground to the high-plinthed verandahs, the head being on the landing, on 
the axis, from the parlour door; the right arm on the landing from the big 
verandah of the inner side of the dining- and the drawing- rooms; the left arm on 
the landing from the long verandah facing the library and the office rooms; the 
right leg on the landing from the verandah of the kitchen block; and the left leg 
on the landing from the verandah of the guest block. 

The usual but unintelligible custom is still followed and the house-builders 
make on the actual building site a figure of the Spirit of the house with powdered 
chalk during the ceremonies of laying the foundations. That chalk-mark is, 
however, defaced imno time, while in the case of the Svastika Mansion the court- 
yard and its five landings, representing the Spirit of the house, may be expected 
to last as long as the house does, 


XVI 


PREFACE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


sides of the inner courtyard. Thus the main structure with facades 
fulfils the plough-shaped Svastika plan,1 and looks like an aeroplane 
(vimana) from the distant front. : 
The eastern wing comprises, on the ground floor, the dining-hall, 
the drawing-room, and a large room partitioned into a shower-bath, 
flush latrine, wash-basin, and dressing-tables. The roadside of this 
wing is parallel to Fort Road, and the other outer side faces the 
east, having a covered verandah and an open platform which is 
connected with the main eastern gate. Below the raised platform 
is the terraced quadrangular lawn, having surrounding paved paths, 
and a well with high plinth and platform standing on the shortest 
side of the quadrangle. The drawing- and dining-rooms have a 
combined large back verandah terminating at two sides of the 
inner courtyard. From the end of this verandah, and covering 
two short sides of the courtyard, is erected from underground a pen- 
tagonal tower to the height of the first floor rooms. The lower part of 
this tower forms the underground summer-room, with two windows 
opening to the grassy courtyard, which, being covered by structures on 
all sides, is free from dust. Its top portion forms the strong-room, 
By one of its sides rises a flight of steps, forming a private staircase. 
By its two other sides proceed a corridor from the big verandah 
which separate the summer-room from the bathroom and the kitchen 
block. The same wing on the first floor comprises three bedrooms— 
one upon the dining-hall and two on the drawing-room—and a 
bathroom corresponding with the ground floor one with similar 
shower-bath; flush commode, wash-basin and dressing-table; a 
large balcony corresponding with the ground floor: big back 
verandah; and two colonnaded front balccnies, one overlooking 
the central road-junction and the other facing the lawn, the well 
and the road-junction at the east. The corridor from the large 
balcony runs between the bathroom and the strong-room to the 
terrace which forms the roofs of the kitchen block and guest rooms. 
The western wing comprises, on the ground floor, the library, the 
office or business room, and a bathroom with all sanitary fittings and 
shower-bath, and runs parallel to Thornhill Road. This wing has a 
long inner verandah along the whole length of the library and the 
office toom and terminating at the longest side of the courtyard. The 
first floor of this wing comprises another‘bedroom, the segregation or 


1 Svastikah langalakarah. Another characteristic is that it has three faces. 


XVIll 


el 


TTT Ta 


EAsTeRN WinG or SvastiKA MANSION TOGETHER WITH THE TERRACED LAWN AND THE WELL Page xviit 


PLATE VI(a) 


Eagle ncaa 


2 aac Se ghee nme 


WESTERN WING oF SvASTIKA MANSION TOGETHER WITH THE OuTHOUsEs AND ORCHARD GRouNDs 


Ss 


INDIA AND ABROAD PREFACE 


confinement room, and a bathroom covering the roof respectively of 
the library, the office, and the bathroom of the ground floor ; one 
outer balcony covering the bedroom and connecting the porch roof, 
and a long inner balcony corresponding with the ground floor 
verandah, which is connected with the terrace forming the roofs of the 
guest rooms and the kitchen block. The segregation room, which, 
like the chapel, was in ancient times an essential feature of a 
dwelling-house, big or small, has three ventilators or gable windows, 
five large windows and three doors, and will answer the require- 
ments of a modern hospital. 

All other rooms, also, ate similarly furnished with sufficient number 
of ventilators, door's, and windows which are built after the directions 
of the texts. At Allahabad the wind blows from the north-east for 
four months and from the south-west for eight months. Thus all 
the living and public rooms of the present plan of the Svastika 
Mansion get a free passage of breeze throughout the year. The 
kitchen block being at the southern end of the courtyard, and being 
shaded by the two towers and the bathroom walls, its smoke cannot 
contaminate the air entering into the living or public rooms. All 
these rooms are daily flushed by the morning sun, but the glare of 
the evening sun is screened off by the situation of the two towers and 
four large balconies and verandahs, four bathrooms, and especially 
by the guest rooms and the kitchen blocks on the west and south 
of the courtyard. On the other hand, the bathrooms at the south-’ 
east corner of the ground floor and first floor get both the forenoon 
and the afternoon sun, and the two others at the north-west corner are 
thoroughly disinfected by the afternoon sun. The courtyard and the 
kitchen block also get the afternoon sun from midday till four in the 


‘ afternoon. The two rooms in the guest block get the sun from nine 


till midday and from two to four in the afternoon. 

The inner kitchen block on the south side of the. courtyard com- 
pulses one non-vegetarian kitchen and one non-vegetarian Indian 
dining-room, and one vegetarian kitchen and a corresponding dining- 
room. Both the kitchens are furnished with smoke chimneys and have 
separate washing-rooms on their sides. There is also a shed at the 
eastern end which may be used for domestic animals or fowls. Rooms 
of the kitchen block are wire-netted in order to prevent the flies enter- 
ing into them. All these rooms, as stated above, are daily disinfected 
by a flush of the sun’s rays from midday till four in the afternoon, The 
guest block, comprising two rooms on the west side of the courtyard 


X1x 


PREFACE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


and a bathroom in continuation of the office room, with all the modern 
fittings, has a small verandah on the east and a large one on the west. 
It faces the outer courtyard, in continuation of which are laid the 
gardens. From this western verandah one can get a clear view of the. 
Thornhill Road rising up and up, and of the Muir College tower and 
the dome of the Vijayanagaram Hall. The outer courtyard, protrud- 
ing below the large verandah on, the west of the guest rooms, has, on 
its left side, the store block, comprising five rooms. _Ohe of these 
rooms is intended to be used as a European type of kitchen, one for 
storing water and the other three are stores proper. In continuation 
of this block, but outside the outer courtyard wall, are built the 
outhouses, consisting of one stable and cow-shed, one garage, four 
servant quarters, and two latrines. The strip of land on the Sarasvati 
(drain) behind the kitchen block, store rooms and outhouses, contains 
the kitchen gardens; and the grounds protruding from the outer 
courtyard beyond the outhouses form the orchard wherein a com- 
plementary pavilion may be built. 

It should be noted that, owing to the extraordinary situation of the 
plot, which is, however, not always available in towns, the-slope, the 
air-passage and wind direction, and the sun’s course could be utilized 
exactly in the way demanded in the texts. ‘This has further enabled 
the distribution of the rooms, blocks, courtyards, and gardens in 
accordance with the directions of the Mdanasdra and other authorities. 
These are really the matters of importance. Once these facilities are 
available, it becomes easy to exercise one’s free choice regarding 
the types of pillars, openings, screen-works, railings for verandahs 
and balconies, balustrades for staircases, and parapets for the roofs, 
all of which in the case of the Svastika Mansion bear, however, the 
hall-mark of ancient architecture with pleasing effect. The very 
few ornaments, which can be selected from anywhere, represent the 
simple patterns of ancient texts and are mostly in lines. They satisfy 
the aesthetic requirements and fulfil the tendency of modern times. 

Much more ingenuity was, however, required in the technique of 
actual construction in accordance with the regulations, even in ancient 
times. For instance, the prescribed rock- or water-foundations, which 
no doubt provide a very long life to buildings, cannot always be 
made available in villages or towns where dwelling-houses have 
to be built. Thus, an adaptation has been made by the application 
of the modern device of a thick ferro-concrete slab resting on arti- 
ficial sand-bed and a brick-soling at the bottom of the ten-feet deep 
pit. Similarly, the flat roofs have been made of reinforced stone 


RX 


p if 19 a ‘ * Xe 
( ‘ i ce ail > ae u) ; Sy oN 


RN 


Close-up VIEW oF THE WrsTERN WING 


4} 
fy 


Po 


ats 
er 


by 
y, 
4 
BE 


SSS Rear, — 


vA teed 


PLATE VI(b) 


Page XX 


Tue DEPTH OF THE FOUNDATION OF THE SVASTIKA MANSION 


PLATE VII 


Page XXT 


INDIA AND ABROAD PREFACE 
concrete slabs in place of the roofs of natural stone slabs, as 
prescribed in the texts. These slabs are supported by steel-girders that 
ate converted by plaster to look like the prescribed wooden beams, 
which, in many places, would be uneconomical in these days. In the 
same way, stone concrete slabs have been used for the-sloping roofs 

‘which surround the whole of the main structure above the door 
and window levels in all the three storeys. These sloping roofs, inci- 
dentally, serve as rain-protectors and have given a very pleasing 
effect to the structure. In a like manner, stone concrete lintels just 
above the door-level run throughout the outer and inner walls, and 
will serve as earthquake bands, because the first-class brick walls are 
thus held fast between the roof slabs and the lintel slabs. They them- 
selves have been mortared by well-ground lime and cinder, which has 
been found by experiment to be better than cement-sand mortar in 
dry climates with very scanty rainfall. Well-seasoned Burma teak of 
the B.B.T.C.L. brand has, however, been carved for the doors and 
the window frames, which latter have been panelled with diamond 
cut glasses of ancient design. Similarly, the floors have been laid 
upon a concrete bed, resting on sand and brick-soling, of precast 
mosaic tiles of various artistic colours and designs in order to econo- 
mize the cost of coloured marble tiles, which have been used only 
in the reception hall. : 

These devices, it may be hoped, will serve the real purpose of the 
ancient architecture, namely, utility, stability, and beauty. These 
qualities have been preserved, also, in matters of modern fittings which 
are necessary to make the modern houses more comfortable. The 

United Provinces Electric Supply Company have made the electric 
installation with rubber-covered Indian cable (which is stated to have 
been manufactured specially to suit the tropical climate) resting on 
teakwood batten. Mr. C. G. L. Gamlen, the then Resident Engineer of 
the United Provinces Electric Supply Company, himself designed the 

artistic layout of the cables, and personally supervised the construction 
in order to make a demonstration. He holds the view that the installa- 
tion should be lasting. With the same purpose of providing durability 
the G.E.C. fans have been used. Similarly, water pipes have been 

laid and rotary pumps fixed, although a well has been dug to the east 
of the lawn in accordance with the direction of the texts, with the 
remarkable result of a good supply of sweet water which is not 
~ available in the same quantity from wells of the neighbouring 
premises. 

XX] 


PREFACE ' HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 

Individual tastes differ, Anything may be beautiful to its lover. 
But aesthetics have reached the status of a science and there are 
recognized standards by which beauty is to be judged. So far as 
architecture is concerned, proportion, uniformity, symmetry, and 
harmony are stated to be the chief elements of beauty. The business 
and originality of a builder, like those of an editor, lie in his ability in 
a wise compilation and in an aesthetic and economical adaptation 
from his authorities. The leased reviewer in The Times’ Literary 
Supplement has quoted an instance from the Manaséra that, ‘if the 
staircase be less or greater the master would certainly be crippled,’ 
and has himself emphasized that ‘such might indeed happen from 
such a faulty construction.! It is with a view to guarding against 
faulty constructions that one’s choice is limited within the suggested 
alternatives in essential matters. In the non-essential particulars one 
is given an unrestricted liberty to introduce new elements, even the 
monkey symbol, if only the whole composition do not become incon- 
gruous and the principles of beauty be not violated. 

The Svastika Mansion, it is hoped, will demonstrate all those prin- 
ciples. Its perimeters and dimensions of its rooms will illustrate several] 
of the prescribed proportions, santika (peaceful), paushtika (pros- 
perous), jayada (progressive), sarvakamika (fulfilling all desires), and 
adbhuta (wonderful). Similarly the Manasara pillars, entablatures 
doors, windows, verandahs, balconies, platforms, courtyards, and 
boundary walls may demonstrate the harmony of the whole com- 
Postion: -e* 2s 

In the limited space of a Preface no further elaboration would be 
justified. This pen-picture may be elucidated by a reference to the 
line-drawings and photographs (Plates 1-xr, XXVIII, Xxx), But only 
a personal inspection, with some previous knowledge of the ancient 
and modern authorities, will enable one to judge for himself as to 
what extent the Svastika Mansion demonstrates the ancient principles, 
wherein lies its adaptation, what is its supporting authority, and 
finally, what is the resultant success. An ordinary visitor may, how- 
ever, testify to its actual comfort and convenience. The writer himself 
would treasure the censure of a distinguished engineer, Mr. T. A. 


1 Page 443 of this volume, 


a The height being, respectively, equal to, 14, 13, 1}, and twice the breadth, 
see the writer’s Encyclopaedia of Hindu Architecture, under Utsepua, for further 
particulars, : 


XXil 


ill 
| | 


PLATE Vitt . 


it 


a ke 


DE EW N BLOCK AND GuEsr 
r SION FROM THE ROOF OF THE Kircue B 
An IN V OF THE SvasTIKA MAN! é F 
be : WV THE DEPTH OF THE OcTAGONAL Tow ER AND Parts o Wo NGS 
PLOCK, SHOWING THE DEpTH 0 F THE T WING 


Page XX{I 


PLATE IX{aq) 


Page XXIII 


EEN Work, PIiLLarR, 


GS 


OF THE WesT1ERN WING SHOWING THE Typrs OF THE Scr 
PaRAPET, AND Ramin 


NSIDE VIEW 


An I 


PLATE X1(a) 


Posten anew 


* 


r bili JEIEY 
(im itie 


SS ee UE <= Tee pen = = eee wees Fey: pet - ; j | 


Aw InnER VIEW SHOWING PARTs OF THE GALLERY, GRAND Staircase, 
RECEPTION HALi 


AND THE 26 FEET DEEP 


Page XXV]1 


PLATE X1I(b) 


| AN INNER VIEW SHOWING PARIS OF TAFE Gatery, Granp Staircase, 


AND THE 26 FEET DEEP 
RECEPTION HALL 


Page XXVII 


INDIA AND ABROAD PREFACE 


Chandra Vidyasagara thrown at him, when, owing to the very 
realistic performance on a Calcutta Stage of the atrocities of the 
indigo-planters, the Pandit was so provoked that he forgot that it 
was a mere play. Mr. Otto, who worked as a Government builder 
for some thirty years and gained familiarity as an officer of the 
Department of Archaeology with the Hindu and Muslim monu- 
ments, remarked that the Svastika Mansion is but a ‘ schoolmaster’s 
exercise-book meant to illustrate the rules and regulations of Hindu 
architecture in a pleasing manner,’ while some learned colleagues 
are delighted to call it the complementary volume of the Manasaya. 


Time alone can prove the stability of the house, which quality 
emphatically distinguishes the old structures from the modern ones. 
Time will also show if anybody else will care to try the ancient 
methods and principles at a lesser strain and a greater economy. 


_ In the construction of the Svastika Mansion, with its covered area of 11,361 
(6495+4670+196) sq. ft., the total cost, including that of land, masonry retaining 
walls on both sides of some 800 feet long drain, and some 500 yards cement-concrete 
roads, is approaching a sum of six figures. It, however, does not represent a correct 
estimate on the house alone. That could be more accurately calculated on the 
basis of the following amount and quality of materials used, which would vary 
according to the size of similar houses, and in consideration of prices and rates 
which must necessarily vary in different places. (Smaller houses, retaining the 
Manasara style, can be built at much lesser cost, still less if cheaper materials 
are used) : 

Bricks, eee: class 503,132, second] Nepal sal, 296 c.ft. for kitchen block | 


class 181,339, third class 48,259). and outhouses. 
Brick ballast, 9,651 c.ft. Glass—diamond cut, 408 sq. ft. (for 
Stone ballast, 3,488 c.ft. windows of main structure), and 
Cement, 1,186 bags (about 60 tons). ordinary 286 sq.ft. (for windows of 
White lime, 1,913 maunds 36 seers. kitchen block, etc.). 
Kankar lime, 3,398 c.ft. Door fittings, polish, etc., Rs.663-9-6. 
Sand, 9,754 c.ft. Precast mosaic tiles, 5,351 sq. ft. 
Cinders; 24,133 c.ft. Marble tiles, 212 sq. ft. 
Surki, 425 c.ft. Marble chips, 549 lb. 
Tron— Colours and paints, 924 Ib. 
Joists, 127 maunds 36 seers. Labour (including masons, carpenters, 
Rods, 279 maunds 20 seers. and labourers), Rs.9,902-1-9. 
Miscellaneous, 68 maunds 35 seers. Cost of drawings, Rs.34. 
Railings, 38 maunds 98 seers, Cost on estimator, Rs.544-2-6. 
Gates, 33 maunds 35 seers. a s travelling allowance, 
Ni sq. ft. 43-11. 
ieee 8 pee Miscellaneous things, Rs.590-9-9. _ 
Burma teak (B.B.T.C.L.), 4,016 sq. ft. | W gl a bathroom fittings, 
c.ft. for frames. S.1,003-12. : 
oP era oe ft. for kitchen | Electric installation and fittings and 
block. lightning conductors, Rs.1,985-2-6. 


ign i i ied fr i . 8. G. Mukerjee ; 

.B.—Design in outline was supplied free by the architect, Mr. S. : 

the elaborate ot the original plan, the supervision of construction, ganda 
labour, purchase of materials, and keeping of accounts were carried out by the 


writer himself. 
ve 


PREFACE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


The expectations of scholars and other commentators have, how- 
ever, not been fulfilled.1 Neither the Bihar Government nor the ~ 
Darbhanga Raj took their advice to experiment with the principles 
enunciated in our Sdstras when, rebuilding the areas devastated by 
the earthquake of 1934. The expectation, too, that the engineering 
colleges might include the study of the Manasara series among their 
compulsory subjects remained unfulfilled; and it is a remarkable com- 
mentary on their interest in this important aspect of essential Indian 
culture that few copies of the first edition were purchased in India, 
the great bulk of them having been sold in Europe and America. 
The parent Governments themselves have not as yet made up their 
mind to- give a leadto the private builders. The national 
importance of the Mdanasdra and the value of the application of its 
principles to practical ends, as exemplified in the Svastika Mansion, 
still remain to be recognized. In other countries Governments and 
other bodies invite and grant awards of their own accord for 
improved housing schemes, competitive designs and economic plans 
to suit the needs of the people and to stand the weather and climate 
of their countries. With the present-day tendencies of all peoples 
to foster national culture Indian Governments might well, with 
sound reason, have adopted ere this the Mdnasara as a standard 
and revived the true Indian architecture by constructing public 
buildings according to the principles of an indigenous science which 
became almost lost and forgotten although it now shows the 
experience of generations and ‘experiments of centuries. In these 
days of mob mentality people are helpless to think for them- 
selves and to decide what to do until and unless they get a lead 
from the Government of the country, even in respect of food 
and clothes, not to speak of house and furniture. The introduction 
of a new style of architecture among the public -will be facilita-. 
ted if the Indian Governments, and the public bodies subordinate 
to them, take it as their own policy and have the courage to 
experiment on the lines of the Mdndsara in order to give a practical 
lead to the public. In this, as in other fields of endeavour, the 
natural hesitancy of individuals and non-Government institutions to 
try something new and untried can only be overcome by the 
example and the publicity provoked by builders constructing 
models of every-day utility, and publishing complete and detailed 


1 See Appendix III, pp. 422-449. 
“xxiv 


INDIA AND ABROAD PREFACE 
‘plans and costs thereof. But the demonstrations themselves need — 
publicity for which again some signal recognition and special reward 
have been found necessary even in big international exhibitions in 
order to draw public attention. A more ready recognition and the 
consequent publicity to the Mdnasdra and the principles exemplified 
in the Svastika Mansion might have been expedited if the series - 
could have been completed during the regime of the great educa- 
tionist Governor, Sir Harcourt Butler, who sanctioned the publica- 
tion of the series by advancing money from public funds,! and if 
‘Mr. H. R. Harrop, the late lamented Director of Public Instruction 
of the local Government, who saw through the details of the publi- 
cation and encouraged the construction, were in office till now. 
Nevertheless I acknowledge with respectful thanks the help received 
from the Government of the United Provinces and the Government 
of India during some thirty years I have been engaged in com- 
pleting the Mdnasara series in seven big volumes involving as it did 
continuous and strenuous labour in addition to my professorial 
and other official duties. 

During the closing months of his governorship of the United 
Provinces, Sir Maurice Garnier Hallett, c.c..£., Ks CeSeltg sls GiSq 
who had appreciated our oriental scholarship in other 
provinces also, happened to inspect a volume of Hindu Archi- 
tecture in an exhibition. Since thenhe took a personal interest 
in the architecture of Manasdra and declared at a function :‘ As 
Professor of Sanskrit and Head of the Oriental Departments of the 
Allahabad University since 1922, and as Dean of the Faculty of Arts 
for two stccessive terms, your work has been ofa high order. Your 
monumental -work, the Mdnasara series, which constitute a complete 
and illustrated survey and encyclopaedia of Indian Archaeology 
and Hindu Architecture, has been highly appreciated by eminent 
scholars all over the world. In recognition of your services in the 
promotion of Sanskrit scholarship and in the field of research, the 
title of “Mahamahopadhyaya”’ has been conferred on you. I 
heartily congratulate you upon this well-merited distinction.’ If 
his interest be supplemented by his successors in office it may 


é ion of an Indian Adviser to the Governor, the local Govern- 

f a ee ane: after the realization of the full sum of money advanced 
Mee me ublic funds for the cost of printing and publishing through the Oxford 
Saree Press, of the seven volumes, the further sale-proceeds, if there be 
Bee sl ep to the successors of the writer. 


RXV 


PREFACE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 
be hoped that this series would ultimately attract the notice 
of the Indian public more effectively. The builders of this great 
country with its unrivalled achievements in science and arts may 
henceforth be induced to consult these volumes and to consider the 
advantages of adopting the architectural principles and methods of 
Manasara. On the eve of my own retirement this hope isa great 
consolation for me for my past 30 years’ continuous labour on this 
task and I shall ever remain grateful to Sir Maurice for his congratu- 
lation. It remains for me to record my gratitude, in addition to Sir 
Harcourt Butler and Mr. Harrop, to Lieut.-Col. R. S. Weir, ¢.L£., 
who. succeeded as Director of Public Instruction, for his uniform 
sympathy and encouragement. To Lieut.-Col. D. W. Crighton, 0.B.E., 
the then Superintendent, Printing and Stationery, and Mr. M. G. 
Shome, his successor, and his staff I owe much more than I can 
adequately express. Words fail me to give vent to my feeling of 
gratitude to Lieut.-Col. Crighton, not only for his faultless technical 
production, but also for his personal assistance in the matter of 
revision and linguistic amendments; in gathering together photo- 
graphs and drawings from the Governments of Java, Sumaira, 
Siam, and French Indo-China, and from the Provincial Superin- 
tendents of the Department of Archaeology of the Government of 
India ; and in preparing the correct plan, elevations, and illustra- 
tions of the Svastika Mansion. : } 

I am in particular indebted to the Director General of Archae- 
ology and his colleagues and staff and the Provincial Superinten- 
dents for the originals of Plates xm, x1va, x1vb, XV,-XVI, XVII, XVII, 
KIxd, xIxb, XIX¢, XXIV, XKVI, XXIX, XXX, XXXI, XXXII, XXxIVd, 
xxxIvb, XXXV, XXXVI, xxxvul, xxxv. I also take this opportunity 
to express my indebtedness to the Governments of Siam, Java, 
Sumatra, and French Indo-China for the supply of the photographic 
views of Plates XLIx, L, LI, LU, LM, LIv, LV, LVI, LVU, LvVIU, 

To Mr. S. GC. Mukerjee, 8.A., G.D.ARC., A.LI.A., the architect, 
more than a courtesy reference is necessary. He has supplied all the 
line-drawings, which needed a unique skill and personal interest in 
order to keep up the spirit and details of the texts. I am also indebted 
to him for working out the original plan of the Svastika Mansion. 
Mr. G. A. Sewell, the chief draughtsman of the Government 


Central Press, who got his training in Roorkee Engineering College, . 


has cleverly redrawn the much-altered ground-plan and the present 


XXV1 


~ 7 See 


INDIA AND ABROAD 7 PREFACE 


' elevation of the house. Messrs. Zaidi Brothers, who, among all the 
local photographers consulted, had the courage and enthusiasm to take 
‘up the task, have supplied the photographic views which needed 
considerable skill. To both of them I, record my thanks. For 
_ occasional technical assistance and guidance from time to time 
Iam indebted to Mr. D. H.R. Rao, the University Engineer ; 
Mr. Asutosh Gupta, the Assistant Engineer of the local Municipality; 
and Mr. T. A. Otto, a retired Chief Engineer of the Public Works 
Department, of considerable building experience and of very 
generous and scholarly temperament. 

I am also grateful to late Sir Lalgopal Mukerji, a Judge of the 
Allahabad High -Court, for his ready assistance and invaluable 
suggestions. For some special facilities in converting the site of the 
Svastika Mansion out of a strip of waste land into a beauty spot, 
I am grateful to the District and Municipal officers and the engineers 
of the combined Public Works and Public Health Departments. I 
am indebted to the then City Magistrate, Mr. A. D. Pandit, 1.c.s., 
and the District Magistrate, Mr. G. W. M. Whittle, 1.¢.s., for 
enabling me to give a proper shape to the site and beautify the 
whole locality by straightening the drains, etc., and encroaching on 
a few yards of waste land whereupon nuisance was committed, 
for which, however, the then Indian Divisional Commissioner, 
imposed a fine of Rs.5 in orderto put a check to such an endea- 
vour. I shall ever remain grateful to Mr. W.G. P. Wall, once 
the Director of Public Instruction, Mr. A. D. Dixon, 1.c.s., once the 
District Magistrate, and Mr. M, S. Singhal, Rai Bahadur, the then 
Divisional Commissioner, on whose combined recommendation the 
‘Governor of the United Provinces, Sir Maurice Garnier Hallett, was 
‘ pleased to sanction, as a special case, the sale of Nazul plot no. 44, 
Thornhill Road ’ in my favour, which was originally held by me 
on lease for 30 years; the freehold right thus secured ‘ for ever’ 
fulfils the requirements of a permanency of the costly demonstration 
of the Svastika Mansion built upon this plot. 

To Dr. K. N. Katju, and Mr. R. N. Basu, the then 
Chairmen of Allahabad Municipal Board, to Rai Bahadur 
K. P. Mathur, the then Director, and Pandit S. G. Naravane, 
the Executive Engineer, of the Public Health Department, I owe 
the badly needed assistance and protection without which it is 
difficult for an ordinary builder to build a house at Allahabad. 


XXVil 


al 


CONTENTS 


PREFACE— Page 
Scope and Sources drawn upon iy 
Elucidation of the structures built after ancient mefpes xiv-xxiv 
Acknowledgment of help received XXV-XXVili 
Method of transliteration of Sanskrit words xxix 

List oF ItLusrRaTIons xxxili-xxxv 

INTRODUCTION—Fine Arts % = 5 

CuapTer I—Pre-Vedic Architecture— 

* Mohenjo-daro 27-37 
Harappa 37-43 
Jhukun 43-45 
Johi, Sehwan and Kohistan 45-46 
Baluchistan ff 46-47 
Waziristan ra 47-53 

CHAPTER II]—Vedic Archean 
Vedas a ote se Pe oe 54-62 
Brahmanas and Sitras ba i 63-64 

Cuapter IJI—Classical or Post-Vedic atc ' 

Buddhist Architecture a Be ah 65-75 
Jain Architecture Be oe se 75-77 
Brahmanical Architecture— z 
Epics saw. ue Be Pac ae 78-80 
Puranas .. ue ae ae om 80-84 
Agamas .. se rs S, 85-92 © 
Miscellaneous treatises om a irae 92-96 
Cuaprer IV—Silpa-Sastras— 
Manasara Au) oe oe fe +» * 97-158 
Mayamata .. are Ye a +» 159-161 
Amfsumadbheda of Kagyap os a. -» 62-165 
Visvakarma oe ai ie -» 166-169 
Agastya ae re ais +. 170-171 
Sanatkumara me a oe ne 172 
Mandana ic 4: ae «+ 173-175 
Srikumara “a as 196-17 
Samararigana-Sitradhara of King eNaeacee at -. > 78-181 
‘Sarngraha ~ ree +» 182-185 

Cuaprer V— Position of the Ménasara i in ieee a -» 186-209 

CHapTer VI—Manasara and Vitruvius .. pee +s 210-239 

Cwarrer VII—Age of the Manasara - , «+ 240-282 

Cuapter VIII—Hindu Architecture in Border are 
Tibet ie ral 5 ass os 283-26%, 
Sikkim ae Fe ae ae 3 284 
Nepal xe oe oe ze -- 284-287 
Kashmir are Pas an ae a 287-289 
Kangra ae ae ae ae +. 289-290 
Ceylon ata is é% ais ++ 290-293 


CONTENTS 


Cuaprer [X—Hindu Architecture in Serindia— 
Khotan 
Tun-Huang Region 
Swat 


CHAPTER X—Hindu AreMecture in Teulada 


Burma 

Siam 

Champa 

Cambodia 

Sumatra Ar, ws 56 
Celebes ~ 

Bali 

Borneo © 

Java 


CHAPTER XI_Hindu Webi a-tine in Outer Tada: — : 


China 
Japan : 
Central Poreiten 
Appenpix I—Indo-Persian Mectectute 


APPENDIX JI—The Future of Indian Architecture 


Appenpix I1I—What others think— 
Dr. Tagore 
Dr. Chintamani 36 
Professor Keith ad 
Mr. Hargreaves 
MM. Dr. Jha 
Mr, Ramananda Greteqt 
Mr. Frederick Grubb 
Professor Vogel 
Dr. Aiyangar .. 
Mr. Natesan .. 
Professor Otto Stein 
Silpasiddhanti Siddhalinga Swami 
Raja Sripratap Singh 

’ The Times? Literary Supplement 
League of Nations—Information Meusuelles 


Pravast te 

Visal Bharat af me 

Hindustani ar = ee 
INDEX 5c ae 


Xxxil 


Page 


294-309 
309-314 


315 ° 


316 
317-322 
322-329 
329-338 
338-347 
348-350 
350-351 
351-352 

352 


8537300 


362-368 
369-371 
372-375 
376-407 
408-421 


422 
422-425 
425-427 
427-428 
428-430 
430-432 
432-434 
434-435 
436-438 


438-439 


439-441 
441 
441 
441-444. 
444-446 
446-447 
447-449 
449 


451-508 | 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


Plate No. 
Griha-stambha 
I(a)—RaAjarajeSvara Temple (east side view) 
I(6)—Lakshmi-Govinda Temple (west side view) . 
II—Site-plan of Svastika Mansion 
ITI(a)—Ground plan of Svastika Mansion Grocnall lear 
TII(6)—Ground plan— 
(7) First floar 
(22) Second floor 
IV(a)—Close-up Front View of Syastie Widen, shoring te 
Octagonal Tower, Segment-shaped Porch, and the 
Griha-stambha (main porch pillar) 
IV(4)—A Distant Front View showing the Railings 
V—Eastern Wing of Svastika Mansion together with tic 
Terraced Lawn and the Well 
“VI(a)—Western Wing of Svastika Mansion aeaitce with the 
Outhouses and Orchard Grounds : 
VI(4)—Close-up View of the Western Wing 5c 
VII—The Depth of the Foundation of the Svastika Mansion .. 
VIII—An Inside View of the Svastika Mansion from the Roof of 
the Kitchen Block and Guest Block, showing the Depth 
of the Octagonal Tower and Parts of the Two Wings 
IX(a)—An Inside View of the Western Wing showing the Types 
of the Screen Work, Pillar, Parapet, and Railings . 
IX(6)—Other Types of Screen Works 
X—A View of the Pentagonal Tower rising ane above the 
Underground Summer-room .. 
XI(a)&(b)—An Inner View showing Parts of the Galle en 
Staircase, and the 26-feet deep Reception Hall 


XII—Elevation of the Svastika Mansion 3c 
XIII—General View, Northern Section, looking Souticenre 
Mohenjo-daro ~2 ae ° 


XIV(2)—Some substantially built Structures in the Centre of 
East Trench, Mohenjo-daro .. 
XIV(b)—General View of Fenestrated Grea in Block = 
Mohenjo-daro ¥ 
XV—General View from East after ecaeaneres Heeane “i 
XVI—Sepulchres at Harappa he a" - 
XVII—Coarse Sandstone Liga at Harappa : ae 
XVIII—Kushan Stupa based on Kunal Stipa, Taxila 


XXxili 


Page 
Frontispiece: 
xiv 


iii 
XXIV 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


Plate No. 
XIX(a)—Buddhist Stipa at Mirpur Khas (view from south-east) 


XIX(b)—Buddhist Stipa at Mirpur Khas (view from north-west) 
XIX(c)—Plan of Mirpur Khas Stipa o. a 
XX(a)—Vedic Fire Altars— 
(i) Parimandala-drona-chit—first and second layers 
(ii) Ubhayata-Prauga-chit—first and second layers .. 
(iii) Ratha-Chakra-chit—first and second. layers 
(iv) Prauga-chit—first and second layers 
(v) Samiihya-chit—first and second layers 
XX(b)—Vedic Fire Altars— 
(i) Syena-chit—first layer 
(ii) 4, 5, —second layer 
(iii) 4, 4, —third layer 
Gy) > ;, —‘tourth layer .. 
Av) besa », —fifth layer 
(Grad) Sp 5, —names of bricks a 
XXI—Ardha-yoga—Typical Ancient Bungalow .. 
XXII—Plan of Bharhut Stipa 
XXIII—Vihara Hall, Plan of Cave 16, eames 
XXIV—Plan of Buddhist Rails 
XXV—Prasada or Royal Palace reconstructed Bon description 
in Pali Texts 
XXVI—Buddhist Bath, generally ee as irene Bath 
XXVII—Pallava Architecture, Kailafanatha Temple at Ellora 


XXVIII (a2)—Bathing Ghat for Tanks 
XXVIII (b)—Bathing Ghat for Rivers 


XXIX—Sri Kaéi-visvanatha Temple, Regne Ae. Renitce 
with its Courtyard, Gopuram and Auxiliary Buildings 
XXXK—Plan of Gandhamadana old Temple and Great rake 
XXXI—Shore Temple, SRS lege oe 
XXXII—Svastika Mansion .. : 
' XXXIII—Royal Palace ’ 
XXXIV (a)—Garvings at Amaravati Stipa 
XXXIV (6)—Sculptures of Amaravati Stipa . 
XXXV—Interior view of Rameévaram . Tanai showing 
Corridor, Ceiling and Supporting Images ais . 
XXXVI—Vajrasana at Bodhgaya : 
XXX VII—Chandakesava Temple of Beli of the eiaeed Plan 
XXXVIlI—Hoysalesvara Temple, Halebid ; 
XXXIX—Jain Pillar 1st 
XL(a)—Gupta Door Sc a oe 
XL(b)—Gupta Temple .. 4 ee 
XLI—Nalanda University ; 
XXXIV 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


Plate No. 
XLIT(a)—General View of Po-ta-la, Lhasa ‘ne = 
XLII()—Window in a Nepalese Temple 
XLIII—Martanda Temple .. Ge Oe 
XLIV—Plan of the Ruined Vihara at Rawat ot sc 
XLV—A Buddhist Stiipa of Chiao-Tzu 
XLVI—A Close-up View of the Caves of the Thousand 
Buddhas 
XLVII—A General View of ine Valley of the Myriad Buddhas . a 
XLVIII—Fresco Decoration in the Interior of a Cave Temple in 
the Caves of the Thousand Buddhas : 
XLIX—The Great Tower of Pagoda Watching at Bangkok 
L—A Pagan Pagoda together with a Monastery showing the 
Hindu Sikhara. Juset :—Hindu Sikhara in a Siamese 
Temple aie 56 
LI—Cham Pillar, elaborately caved 
LII—Square Cham Pillar : 
LIIJ—Cham Temple of ioe Hever 
LIV—Ankor Vat af 
LV—Po-Klang-Garai 
LVI—Po-Klang-Garai (another Han) 
LVII—Boro-Budur : ac 
LVIII—Chandi Pawan Ste 
LIX(a)—Japanese Temple Hall with Svastika eee Work 
LIX(4)—A Japanese Pagoda 
LX—Maya Temple of Patron Deity iit, upon high- 
terraced Platform of the Hindu Sikhara Type covering 
an area of one acre, Chichen Itza, Central America 
LXI—The usual Hindu type of Massive Stone Columns at the 
Doorway of the Kukulcan Maya Temple 
LXII—The Sarnath Type of Maya Gate underneath the Hall 
of Thousand Pillars at Chichen Itza “6 
LXIII—Type of Pillar (under construction) Svastika Mendon 


(east verandah) aE ° 
LXIV—ASokan Hall (reconstructed) .. ee 
LXV—A Free Pillar in the Kailasa Temple of Ellora aC 


XXXV 


Page 
284 
285 
288 
289 
304 


395 
310 


311 
328 


329 
330 
331 
332 
333 
334 
335 
354 
355 
370 
371 


372 
373 


374 


375 


379 
380 


INTRODUCTION 
FINE ARTS 


ART Is SyNoNyMous with Sil/pa and Kala, or more precisely, with 
Silpa-kala and is the subject-matter primarily of the Silpa-sastras. 
The traditional list of sixty-four arts is, however, referred to in at 
least three other classes of our literature. The mythological group 
includes the Srimad-bhagavata, the Harivarnga and the Vishnu-purana. 
The Buddhist-Jain group is represented by the Lalita-vistara and the 
Utiar adhydyana-sitra. And the erotic group consists of the Kama-sitra 
of Vatsyayana and others. The mythological group makes mention 
of arts in connexion with the various kinds of knowledge acquired 
by Krishna and Balarama. In the text of the Srimad-bhagavata, 
however, only the number, not the specification of the arts, is given. 
It is stated that the sixty-four arts were learnt in so many, that is 
sixty-four, days.1 But of its numerous commentators, some supply 
both the number and the specification, while others only the number.? 
The commentators Vira-raghavacharya and Vij aya-dhvaja-tirtha, who 
make mention only of the traditional number of arts as sixty-four, 
do not disclose the source of their information. Visvanatha-chakra- 
vartin also does not specify the sixty-four arts, but he mentions the 


1 stare Farafaer, aremafraat Te: | 
Tee Tae TH AMT II 


Tat adie frat cerita vefsery | 
Wa ALATA TafaaTaT ay II 
aHlaTeaay at aoeGT T | 


FATAATISAT AAA Maat: HOT: Ut 
—(Srimad-bhagavata, Part x, Chap. XLV, verses 33-35.) 
2 (4) FeRAM aes aWAteiaraiearg-attetra: arTEg: | 
—(Vira-raghavacharya), 
(0) agarea TRIER MeTaTaead: Tae: Fe: Aga ewer: 
fare Scare: | 

—(Vijaya-dhvaja-tirtha). 
() aradieag:sftenen: a: ates RSET: | 
—(Visvanatha-Chakravartin). 

(4) qradeagsfteren: area taceaat fered ar er eae | 


—(Sridhara-svamin.) 
I 


INTRODUCTION HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


Saiva-tantra as his source. Sridhara-svamin and Vallabhacharya 
also, who give a detailed account of the sixty-four arts, derive 
their information from the same source. The Saiva-tantra, however, 
it should be noted, is not the name of a book, but is a branch of 
mystic literature which can hardly be identified for the verification 
of the names and other details of the arts. Sukadeva, another 
commentator, who also specifies the sixty-four arts, quotes in toto 
from his authority named Vidydsangraha-nibandha, which, as its title 
indicates, is a mere compilation from some other sources. Lastly, 
Jiva-gosvamin, who also describes the sixty-four arts in detail, 
appears to have derived his information from the Vishnu-purdna 
and the Harivamsa, which is a supplement to the Mahabharata. Thus, 
as quoted by Jiva-gosvamin, the Vishnu-purdna* and the Harivaméa® 
admit, indirectly though, a familiarity with the sixty-four arts, and 
state that the sixty-four (arts) were learnt in sixty-four days. The 
former, further, adds that it must be wonderful (adbhuta) to learn 
sixty-four arts in sixty-four days, while the latter explains this 
wonder by saying that Krishna and Balarama had extraordinary 
memories (§rutidhara). The impracticability of learning sixty-four arts 
in no more than sixty-four days did not strike any of the commenta- 
tors of the Srimad-bhagavata, presumably either because they were 
not at all familiar with the extensive knowledge demanded from 
and the wide field of study required for each of the sixty-four arts, 


(©) aaeagrea dat aad: ser 1 drat Taal aguieasea 
aererad: aEsteron: fre: dorreg: | aes faererehraea | 
—(Suka-deva). 

(f) aradt: aon: domeateft agsftenen:) dae utaeterain afawact- 
fedueoradrcarta santa | erat ara ata feta, ert ¢ Seals | 
aur a fag efaat 7 | 

—(Jiva-gosvamin). 

(2) agufedergad: aerRrt: Gaal Tad: Fer: agattener: Usted: | wpe 
wort agTend: seat wea: | fret a mech garter Hor cafes feaat 
fafetan | at: Her: aacealaar Fever TT Beare A 

—(Vallabhacharya). 


TERA ISM Tastes 
2 ata afrat at aaractiaraary | 
TARTATAG TSA AT ATAATT 


INDIA AND ABROAD 
FINE ARTS 


or because they might have had no doubt about the superhuman 
ability of Krishna and Balarama, which has been admitted on so 
many other occasions in the Srimad-bhagavata itself. But though 
equally mythological in character, this point has struck both ae 
Vishnu-purdna and the Harivamga wherein an explanatory note is 
purposely added. In the former it is stated that it was wonderful 
(adbhuta) for Krishna and Balarama to learn sixty-four arts in 
sixty-four days, while in the latter they are stated to have been 
gifted with the power of remembering things by hearing only once 
(Srutidhara). The explanation of the Harivamga is more express 
admitted in the Srimad-bhdgavata, where it is stated that ates 
retained everything by simply listening only once. 

But in spite of all these explanations one cannot help thinking 
that at the time of the Srimad-bhagavata, as well as in the different 
times of its commentaries, there was no practical knowledge of all the 
sixty-four arts; because, otherwise, the authors of these treatises 
could not have passed over the point so light-heartedly ; further, in 
other literature such an indifference is not met with. In the times of 
the Vishnu-purdna and the Harivamga, however, the state of things 
seems to have been different. The arts were then living objects ; 
they were then more real, more practical; at any rate people had 
more familiarity with them. 

The heretic group refers to the arts in connexion with the school- 
ing of Bodhi-sattva and of Mahavira. It is stated in the Lalita-vistarg2 
that ‘ Whatever Sdstras are current in the regions, all figures and 
writings and calculations, all roots, all arts in their immensity current 
on earth were iearnt by him in many millions of ages (kalpas).’? In 
the Uttaradhyayana-sitra® it is stated that ‘He (Mahavira) studied the 


1 See above, p. 1, note 1; p. 2, notes 1 and 2. 
2aeatar aft Tattea a cae 
ten fatter wratt +t aaa 
a farerarmgaretinn aT 
qivay, faferagaagact Blew: 
—(Chap. X, 1, p. 142, ed. Rajendra Lal Mitra), 
3 araardy worn & fares ftentfar | 
sear a ata Ter fracat i 
at Saas WSsifrarsaag Shah 
Qa Hoe VA Veh Aral Gel (Chap. XXI, 6-7). 
3 


INTRODUCTION HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


seventy-two arts, constantly applying himself to them, he was in the 
full bloom of youth, he had a fine figure and good looks. His father 
procured him a beautiful and beloved sweetheart, Ripini, with whom 
he amused himself in his pleasant palace, like a Dvikundaka god,’ 
In the Buddhist and the Jain periods a far better knowledge of these 
arts are thus evinced. In the Lalita-vistara it is distinctly stated that 
‘ all arts were current on the earth in their immensity (aprameya) and 
they were learnt in millions of years (bahukalpa-kotyah).’ 

That youth and beauty are essential conditions for the cultiva- 
ticn of arts has also been admitted in the Lalita-vstara. Therein 
it is stated that ‘when the Prince had duly grown up, he was 
taken to the school under a hundred thousand auspicious arrang- 
ments. . . . Now Visvamitra, the school-master, feeling the 
beauty and glory of the Bodhi-sattva to be insufferable, fell prostrate 
on the ground.’? 

In the Uttarddhyayana-siitra the number of arts is limited to seventy- 
two, but they are not specified anywhere in the text. The context 
also demands a different reading for the expression ni-1-kovi-e,? as 
suggested in a similar context by the expression bahu-kalpa-kotyah 
(many millions of years) in the Lalita-vistara, in order to give a sense 
of the time or the close application of the mind required in learning 
the seventy-two arts. But what is really important is the fact that 
almost all the necessary circumstances under which the arts can be 
cultivated are more perfectly clear in this text. It is stated that ‘ the 
student of arts must be in the full bloom of his youth and must have 
a fine figure (suriipa) and good looks (priyadarsana) himself; he must 
be united with a charming (ripavati) and beloved (priya) wife, who 
should be the personified beauty (ripini) to keep him constantly 
amused and refreshed; and lastly, he must have a beautiful palace 
(prasada) to live in.’ In other words, a student of arts should be 
surrounded with all beautiful things both internally and externally ; 
he should live in an atmosphere of beauty and youth; all his sense 
organs must be in a state to appreciate and enjoy; the eyes to see 
pretty things, the ears to hear pleasant sounds, the nose to smell frag- 
rance, the tongue to taste sweet things, the skin to touch delicately 


1 Lalita-vistara, Chap. X, Trans. (R. L. Mitra), p. 181. 

2 It has been very curiously translated as “an acquired knowledge of the 
world” (Jacobi, SBE, Vol. XIV, p. 108), which can hardly be the rendering of 
its Sanskrit equivalent WVitikovida. 


4 


INDIA AND ABROAD FINE ARTS 


soft objects, and, above all, the mind to think, to feel, and to will the 
beauties of arts. 

Youth and beauty as an essential condition for the cultivation and 
development of arts reached a fuller recognition and a more elaborate 
treatment in the erotic group of literature. In the Kama-éastra 
youth and beauty is the main theme. Whatever is discussed therein 
is nothing but a reference to the natural inclinations of young 
hearts of cultured men and women in their esthetic mood. Kama 
or sensual desires, can only arise in the mind of youth in a 
atmosphere of beauty. A seed cannot germinate in the desert, nor 
can an artistic idea grow up in the fossilised heart of an old person. 
This fact has been fully recognized in the mythological and the 
Buddhist-Jain groups of literature also, for, in spite of their spirit 
being avowedly religious, it was necessary to train Krishna and 
Balarama on the one hand and Bodhisattva and Mahavira on the 
other in artistic and other matters, not in their advanced age but 
in their youth and in an atmosphere of beauty. This point can 
be abundantly developed by a reference to the extant arts of all 
countries, of all nations and of all sects. But before proceeding 
further with illustrations it would be convenient first briefly to 
examine the traditional list of arts. In the Kama-sitra of Vatsya- 
yana?* the sixty-four arts are specified in connexion with the 
accomplishments to be acquired by men and women : 

1. Gita—Vocal music, including everything from composition 
to singing, in all scientific manner and comprising four or five 
main topics.” 


1 qalaisfaarrer yaad, wags Tasiaaer Feats tt 
WAT SAT HT AT TAR ATATE | 
WY, TAY, TAL 
.. . Sarfrearmtsa faerat aA, 
afa agsftexcnfaar: aragarearaataet: 1 
2 coat gat Fa aT waa TI 
Adistaisaa Ta sat wala i ~—(Yasodhara on Kama-siiira). 
aa itd wafer teat eaerferta: oceania: gare 
aerator WRATASA | ~—(Jiva-gosvamin on Srimad-bhagavata). 
Tat TTA HTT CATT: TTT ATCT: 
aaa TAM SHT Caer TST | 
—(Vallabhacharya on Srimad-bhdgavata). 


5 


iNTRODUCTION HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


2. Vadya—Instrumental music, which also admits four or five 
varieties. 

3. Nritya—Dancing, which includes many more things than the 
ordinary connotations of the term.? 

4. Natya—Dramatic and scenic art, including acting. Vatsya- 
yana reads this much later in the list as Najakakhyayika-darsana, 
which means both seeing dramatic representation and reading stories 
in prose and verse. This deals with the ten kinds of drama and 
numerous other details which are essentially artistic in matter, spirit 
and form. 

5. Alekhya—Painting, which includes six essential parts, namely, 
varieties of beauty, proportions, representation of sentimental grace, 
resemblance, colours, reliefs.* 

6. Viseshaka-chchhedya—Tattocing, specially referring to a kind of 
paint on the face which is stated to be liked very much by fashion- 
able young ladies (vildsinz). 

7. Landula-kusuma-bali-vikdra—Obviously this refers to three sepa- 
rate things, namely, the artistic arrangements of rice-meal, flowers, 
and dishes. All the commentators* seem to have missed the point. 


* gasa faad ar ad gfe a1 


PATA Aa TAT A TATRA I 
—(Yasodhara on Kéma-siira). 

2 acorentacied fara wat Ca a 

STATA Tale TAIT TE: 

qelafaas, Teamtedsate | Ta 

eat AT ACS AT TTT aT feta 

HUTA TeMATST ATT UI 

TAR Ff TRAIT Las Tererate Pata | 


— (Yasodhara on K ama-siitra) 
8 eal: TAT ATASTACA TT | 
aged atrarmen eft frat teeta II 
—(YaSodhara on Kama-sitra). 
* PSO FIAT F PATS ATT I 
—(Jiva-gosvamin). 
wages geieat Meat SAMIST arate atest: 
Goat AT SATTAT HIRT: 
—(Vallabhacharya). 
sre fverTg aaa: aera areawat at afipisty wfafrara | 
war sera: Raioemfegaet waar: \—(Yasodhara). 
6 


INDIA AND ABROAD a oe 


They have curiously divided the phrase thus: Tandula-bali-vikara 
and Kusuma-vikdra, and explain the former as referring to offer- 
ings to deities and the latter to making garlands also for worship. 
The context makes such interpretation untenable. These are essen- 
tially artistic matters and have nothing to do even with the worship 
of the god of love, as the commentator of the Kama-sitra thinks. as 
an alternative. Besides, worship of a deity is nowhere mentioned 
directly or indirectly in the list. The avowedly religious learnings 
are confined to the Vedas, Upanishads, Dharma Sastras, etc., which 
are separately taught, as stated in the mythological group. More- 
over, the foregoing and the following topics make such an inter- 
pretation quite unconnected. It is easily understandable that an 
accomplished young lady must cultivate these arts as arts and not 
as religion. 

8. Pushpastdrana—Making beds of flowers. It, of course, refers to 
gardening, which is separately mentioned later on.* 

9. Dasana-vasandnga-raga*—This also refers to three separate arts, 
namely, the staining of the teeth, dyeing of cloth, and colouring 
of the body by means of powder, etc. 

10. Mani-bhimika-karman-The art of setting jewels on the (marble) 
floor for use particularly in summer, as stated by Yasodhara.* 

11. Sayana-rachand—The art of bed-making. According to Jiva- 
gosvamin,* and probably Vallabhacharya,° it refers to the making 
of bedsteads and couches, etc., which is an item of architecture 
mentioned as a separate art later on. According to Yasodhara, 
this is necessary for digesting the food and for enjoyment.® 


1 Yagodhara guesses an alternative sense also : viz., making garlands with flowers 
which is separately mentioned later on. 
Vallabhacharya passes it over, calling it as meq) 
Jiva-gosvamin gives the real sense: 
gufeta: TACT | 
2 Curiously, Vallabhahearya detects a sexual sense here when he says : 
SATaY SAITAMA TAT: ST RSAT: ATTTAAT A TATA AT TREAT 
8 According to Jiva-gosvamin this should be done, as shown by the architect 


Maya in building a wonderful hall for the Pandavas (for details, see infra, p. 247 
and the writer’s Indian Architecture, 1st Ed., pp. 166, 167, note 4). 


4 qaeafatrarry | 

5 art ATA, TT PATO 

6 seq HATSTARTAT CHT AAT AAA TATTOO TAMI TAT | 
This is fully elaborated in connexion with TaATarfeat (vide infra). 


il 


INTRODUCTION HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


12. Udaka-vddya—Playing on an instrument known ag jala. 
taranga,* or china-cups containing varying quantities of water to 
regulate the tune and produce harmonic notes like musica] glasses, 
or an instrument (invented by Franklin) the sounds of which are 
produced from bell-shaped glasses placed on a frame-work that 
revolves on its centre, while the rims are touched by the moistened 
finger. ; 

13. Udaka-ghdta—The art of making fountains, called jala- 
stambha-vidya by Jiva-gosvamin.? 

14. Chitra-yoga—Pictorial arts, i.e. various kinds of painting.8 

15. Malya-grathana-vikalpa—The arts of making garlands.4 

16. Sékharapida-yojana—The art of putting on ornaments (of 
flowers) on the hair and top of the head.® 

17. Nepathya-prayoga—Scenic representations, the art consisting in 
putting on clothes and ornaments for the stage. This elaborates 
the art mentioned in the preceding item. According to Vallabha- 
charya this also includes the construction of the stage itself, 


* According to Yagodhara it is like the murga or a drum. Vallabhacharya 
does not think of it seriously when he says, ‘ as sounds are naturally produced on 
water’; 

Ta tad Cates ater: ersehrafer 

Jiva-gosvamin thinks that this music can be produced ina tank also: 

eC eeMTaTAS Sea aT ATMA | 

2 Vallabhacharya makes it a childish play with water : 

TT Teatqerqae weofa aeat aesta fade ar west | 
Yasodhara also thinks it to be a play with water : 


Mi ’ 


and includes the preceding one also under a general heading of ‘ water-play.’ In 
fact Sridhara-svamin has included the two items (nos. 11, 12) under one heading. 
8 Practically all the commentators have found it difficult to explain this. Jiva- 
gosvamin is vague when he interprets it as the means to see the various wonderful 
things : 
APTS TIT AAI: 
Vallabhacharya thinks it to be the garlanding of flowers (fafaar: sHTet:). 
Yagodhara, following him, sees sexuality everywhere and says that this supplements 
the act of FAA, a separate item (see below): 
Tarai ahammar: | Siar Tafa ( ? fe) aenarat | 
arias teat | Ut st ear y aaa Tae: | PTT Toaaayy | 
4 Jiva-gosvamin passes over these seven items as too easy to understand. 


Both Vallabhacharya and Yasodhara make it unnecessarily to mean the making 
of flowers-garlands for the head, which is mentioned in the next item. 


® The skill consists here in artistically wearing and not making these ornaments. 


8 


INDIA AND ABROAD ines 


18. Karna-patra-bhanga—Painting the cheeks before the ear with 
sandal and other pastes. Yasodhara thinks it to be a part of scenic 
representation. No doubt it is a special kind of toileting. 

19. Gandha-yukti—Perfumery, or the art of making perfumes. 

20. Bhishana-yojana—The art of putting on ornaments on the 
various parts of the body. YaSodhara interprets it as the display of 
jewellery on the person for stage purposes and classifies under 
two heads, Samyojya and Asamyojya.* 

21. Aindra-jdla—The art of jugglery; according to Vallabha- 
charya it does not admit of a rational explanation and has twenty 
varieties which are, however, not specified. 

22. Kauchumdara-yoga—The arts as taught by Kuchumara, the 
author of the Aupanishadadhikdra. According to the commentators 
these refer to some unspecified tricks.2 Kuchumara need not 
necessarily mean the author of that name when no arts bearing 
his name are generally known. The term ‘kucha’* means the 
‘female breast’; hence it is just possible that the art may refer to 
the nursing or decoration of the female breast.° 

23. Hasta-ldghava—Prestidigitation. The art is well known; this 
is extensively practised as an amusement in fashionable societies and 
considered to be an accomplishment for a young person. 

24. Vichitra-Saka-p ipa-bhakshya-vikara-kriyad—The cookery, or the 
art of cooking various kinds of vegetables, cakes, and (all other) 
eatables. The vegetables comprise ten different things, namely, root, 


1 Vallabhacharya suggests an alternative interpretation also: 
wag iraetatte: FararaareT Frater aTaTaT aA aT | 
2eq dare = altererocdtrmaenichait | «aes HeTq_UE- 
aac ae dg AST Ag A Ye det eT gtd 
fararard | 


3 eqfarararea SASTAT | 
—(Jiva-gosvamin). 


Stl 
—(Vallabhacharya). 
HAO SIA aATTATAT: | 
—(Yasodhara). 

“The reading ‘ kuchamara’ is not, however, available ; but when the authors 
of the other reading (kuchumara) are not clear about the sense, an emendation 
in the reading does not seem unjustified. 

5 Tt will be pointed out later on that some of these arts are meant for the females, 
some for males, and the rest for both males and females. 


9 


INTRODUCTION HINDU ARCHITEC TURE In 


leaf, shoot (as of a bamboo), forepart, fruit, trunk, offshoot, skin 
flower, and thorn.! ; 

Cakes, including bread, are also of various kinds, but they are 
not specified. The eatables are divided into four classes, namely, 

(a) bhakshya or charvya, things to be eaten by chewing, 
(b) bhojya or choshya, things to be eaten by sucking, 
(c) lehya, or things to be licked, and 

(d) peya, or things to be drunk. 

The peyas are divided into two classes, namely, cooked (with fire) 
and uncooked. The former is called ydsha and admits of two 
varieties known as soup and decoction. The latter also has two 
varieties called the asandhdnakrita and sandhdnakrita. The samdhana- 
krita are those which are made by distilling, such as fermented 
or spirituous liquors, and are divided into drdvita and adrdvita : the 
former is made by mixing water, sugar, and tamarind, and is known 
as drink or spirituous liquor; and the latter is made of liquified 
herbs mixed with palmyra fruit and plantain flower (mocha),? and 
is called rasa, i.e. essence or juice. 

25. Pdnaka-rasa-ragdsava-yojana—Preparation of beverages. Ac- 
cording to both Yagodhara and Vallabhacharya dsava implies 
spirituous liquor and indicates intoxication of three kinds, namely, 
mild, ordinary, and high. The term raga is stated to imply three 
things, namely, those to be licked, powders and liquids tasting salt, 
tamarind, pungent and slightly sweet.® 

YaSodhara thinks* this, and the preceding item, may be includ- 
ed under one heading, namely, cookery. But a number of most use- 
ful arts are referred to here which are even at the present time prac- 
tised separately. It should be noted that the stages of development 


1 HOTA RT HOTVSTSSHT | 
aa TT wWepsatt a safad ATT 
—(Quoted from some unknown author by Yagodhara.) 
* Plantain grows out of this, which looks like the cauliflower or cabbage. 
SUN Waa LITT Ta: TAT: | 
FAMTFORETATS LTATATT: 1 
—(YaSodhara quotes from some unknown work.) ? 
Sweaters saftata atkfeerig, — anrfranistaarafasra- 
ata: | aa Wat arate, faa oz qatar) aarat | eaKad 
fafeieget wa) cenetarcrarafaearaststt fafa) azarae ser fear 
PAT 


Io 


jnDIA AND ABROAD FINE ARTS 


and perfection in the art of making foods and beverages are the 
surest indication of the state of culture and civilization as well as 
of the economic condition of nations and communities. 

26. Siuchi-vdya-karman—Tailoring and weaving. According to 
Yagodhara tailoring is of three kinds, namely, sivana or sewing of 
coat, etc., atana or darning of torn cloth, etc., and virachana or making 
of bed sheets, etc. Weaving implies manufacture of cloth or the 
whole textile industry, including making of yarn, which is separately 
mentioned later on (see no. 36). 

27. Sitra-krida—The art of playing with thread and rope. 
According to YasSodhara the play consists in showing by sleight of 
hand a piece of thread in perfect condition after tearing it to pieces 
or burning it to ashes, and would imply a kind of magic. According 
to Jiva-gosvamin the play consists in moving dolls, etc., like living 
beings, with the help of a thread, and also walking on rope and un- 
binding oneself after having been bound up with a rope. This 
would imply acrobatism in addition to magic. 

28. Vina-damaruka-vddya—Playing on lute and small drum.* 
These are included in the instrumental music, but they are specially 
mentioned, as YoSodhara says, first, because stringed instrumental 
music and lute music are very important, secondly, because they 
are difficult to learn especially at the commencement, and, lastly, 
because on these instruments the words (letters) played can be heard 
as distinctly pronounced. 

29. Prahelika—Solution of riddles, charades, etc. 

30. Pratimaélé—Modelling or making images, 1.e. sculpturing. 
This interpretation is very definitely asserted by Jiva-gosvamin and 
Vallabhacharya.2 But Yasodhara interprets this in an entirely 
different way and says that it refers to a kind of versification 
beginning with a particular letter of a verse,® but that is separately 
mentioned under a different heading (see no. 56). 


1 See above, item no. 2. 
2 aqacgafaafatrarry | —(Jiva-gosvamin). 
TGTTALPCT | —(Vallabhacharya). 
Sa aaretteanta Tafa: | aT Areal ararat 71 aay (in some unknown 
work): 
a fresta HATTA SraTaTeT CATA | 
qaat waar serrate area 
It 


iNTRODUCTION HINDU ARCHITECTURE Ly 


Sculpture as an important art is well recognized and elaborately 
treated in a branch of literature like most of these arts. 

31. Durvdchaka-yoga—Mimicry, i.e. the art of an imitative 
resemblance in one animal to another or to some inanimate object 
in sound or sense, as stated by Yasodhara.2 

32. Pustaka-vdchana—Elocution, i.e. the art of effective speaking, 
more especially of public speaking, regarding solely the utterance 
or delivery. This interpretation is supported by both Jiva-gosvamin 
and Vallabhacharya.? But YaSodhara refers this to recitation in 
particular. 

33. Natakakhy dyikd-darsana—Tableaux vivants, or what are 
called ‘living pictures.’ The art consists in exhibiting a motionless 
representation of a well-known character, painting, scene, etc., by 
one or more living persons in costume. That it is different from a 
dramatic performance is clear and needs no explanation. 

34. A dvya-samasya-pirana—Solution of verbal puzzles which are 
elaborately discussed in a class of literature known as Alamkara- 
Sastra. 

35- Pattikd( petika)-vetra-vana-vikalpa—The art of making bows 
(? sofa, basket), sticks, canes, etc., with thread. According to Yaéso- 
dhara this art also includes the making of cane chairs, cane beds, 
ete: 

36. Tarku-karaman®—Making twist with a spindle or a distaff: 
this refers to the art of spinning. Weaving is separately mentioned 
(see no. 26). 


gee saaet | TT TANT: Areal ararates | 
Vallabhacharya says that it refers to AGATA | 
Jiva-gosvamin adopts the ordinary sense : 
TIER, T UTI TAS TIT: | 
* afeeterafaerararate aoe, ateraean Tara | 
Safest Geet yentafatean ata: a aT | ATTA 
TeaATH aT aT I 
4 Vallabhacharya reads it differently, Patrikd-chitra-vachana-vikalpa, and refers to 
ram-fighting, etc., which is however included under a separate heading (see no. 44): 
’ Both Sridhara-svamin and Vallabhacharya misread it as Tarka-karman 
(debating). In Vatsyayana’s Kdma-sitra it is read as Taksha-karmani (carpenter’s 
works) ; and the commmentator Yafodhara interprets it as arate 
(making of balls with inferior materials). But carpentry is expressly mentioned 
in the next item. 


I2 


DA 
INDIA AN. BROAD ee 


4. Takshana—Carpentry, i.e. the art of wood-carving in makin 
seats, beds, doors, etc.* 8 

38. Vastu-vidya—Architecture, the different parts of which are 
assigned to sthapat, siitra-grakin, vardhaki and takshaka.? It refers 
to the art of building and includes everything built or constructed 
from the palace to the bird’s nest and from the image of a god fo 
that of an insect.® Thus, in the first place, it ‘denotes the con- 
struction of all kinds of buildings, religious, residential and military 
and their auxiliary members and component mouldings. Secondly, 
it implies town-planning, laying out gardens, constructing market- 
places, making roads, bridges, gates, digging wells, tanks, trenches 
drains, sewers, moats, erecting enclosure-walls, embankments, dias, 
railings, flights of steps for hills, ladder, etc. Thirdly, it denotes 
articles of house furniture, such as bedsteads, couches, tables, 
chairs, thrones, fans, wardrobes, clocks, baskets, conveyances, cages, 
nests, mills, etc. It also includes the making of garments and 
ornaments, etc. It discusses, as preliminary matters, selection of site, 
testing of soil,* planning, designing, finding out cardinal points for 
orientation of buildings, dialling, and astronomical and astrological 
calculations.’ 

Architecture also implies sculpture, like many of the other arts, 
and deals with the carving of phalli, idols of deities, statues of sages, 
images of animals, birds, fish and insects. 

39. Suvarna-riipya-ratna-partksha®—Testing of gold, silver and 
jewels. 

40. Dhatu-vdda—Metallurgy, i.e., the art of setting, purifying, 
and mixing up of the metals such as earth(?), stone, and quick- 
silver. 


1 Yagodhara says that it refers to vardhaki-karman, but that is not correct 
because takshaka and vardhaki have got different works to do (see under the next 
heading Vastu-vidya). 

2 See infra, p. 98 and the writer’s Indian Architecture, 1st Ed., p. 25, and 
Dictionary of Hindu Architecture, 1st Ed., pp. 709-712, 725-73 wi 

8 See the writer’s Dictionary of Hindu Architecture, 1st Ed., Preface, p. viii, and 
Indian Architecture, 1st Ed., pp. 1; 2+ : 

4 This refers to practical geology. Mining is separately mentioned (see no. 41). 

5 The commentators have not included suvarna which is, however, found in 
a text of the Kama-siira. It should be noted that the four items beginning with this 
fall under one category. ¥ 


6 & ARITA GT qata TATA TET CAT: | 
(YaSodhara prefers the reading “4 in place of @.) 


13 


INTRODUCTION HINDU ARCHI TECTURE IN 


41. Mant-réga-jnana (ragaka-ranjana)—Art of colouring Precious 

stones. 

42. Akara-jidna—Mining, or the art of ascertaining the existence 
of mines from external appearances.! 

43. Vrkshdyurveda-yoga—The art of gardening, which, according 
to Yasodhara, includes planting, nursing, curing, and artistically 
arranging trees in private house gardens.2 Vallabhacharya refers 
it particularly to the fruit gardens. 

44. Mesha-kukkuta-ldvaka-yudha-vidhi—R am-fighting, cock-fight. 
ing, quail-fighting. Such things are shown, according to Yagodhara 
in the performance of a circus party.* 

45. Suka-sarika-praldpana—Teaching of parrots, etc., to speak, 
The art consists in a sort of singing and delivering (good) news 
through the birds.® 

46. Utsddana (-ne sathuahane cha kausala)—Massage or shampooing, 
i.e. rubbing the limbs with unguents, pomades, etc., both with 
hands and feet as Yagodhara says.® 

47. Kesa-marjana-kausala’—Coiffure or hair-dressing. 

48. Akshara-mushtika-kathana—Guessing unseen letters and things 
held in a closed fist, as stated by Jiva-gosvimin and Vallabha- 
charya. But, according to YaSodhara, the art consists in guessing 
things held in a closed fist, like the revealing of the hidden and 
suggested meanings in a poetic composition; it admits of two 
varieties, namely, sabhasa (suggestive) and nirabhasa (unsuggestive), 


_ + VaAtsyayana does not include this. His commentator Yagodhara says that this 
is found in some other texts, 


* Cragftetafararataraarse Téterarat: | 
*qarot Haaren: we ttattsazor TATA HM Teas | 
* asa aera | TaMTEIeteagatrat Aer ae az 
—(YaSodhara), 

6 parted tota aeass Teak | 

—(YaSodhara). 
‘nad fafa Tanai searearea az Teal wae TEMAS | ATTY 

Hed Carer | 
For the purpose of the Kama-sastra such an erotic art has obviously a great use. 
i AL or are TOTAAL | 
—(YaSodhara), 
14 


INDIA AND ABROAD FINE ARTS 


the object being twofold, namely, to guess hidden things and to 
make concise composition. 


49. Mlechchhita-vikalpa—Use of secret code language or modify- 


ing ordinary language so as to make it not ordinarily intelligible, 
as stated by YaSodhara.? 


50. Desa-bhasha-vijndna—Knowledge of languages of different 
countries.® 


51. Pushpa-Sakatika-nirmita-jndna*—Making of flower carriages. 

52. Nimitta-jndna—The art of reading omens from the crowing 
of crows, etc., as stated by Vallabhacharya.® 

53- Yantra-matrika—The art of making monograms, logographs, 
and diagrams. YaSodhara attributes this to Visva-karman and calls 
it ghatand-Sastra (science of accidents) .° 


Laat gfteta afeantftafee: at ararat faerat A 1 Ta ATATAT eA 
ashe Feat wat eed Teaaes TeMATIST | TTA AegR AT | TAT HIG 
TeATARTAATTAT | 


YaSodhara illustrates this by quoting verses from the Chandra-prabha-vijaya-kavya 
of Ravigupta. 


2A | AES feact Teams | Ta 
fancat tea: Gararataat: | Tear 
ales af ated: ale aera: | 
fargormifaqataragatatata airy UI 
8 TTHRATGATTATS Tetras F | 
—(YaSodhara). 
4 Vatsyayana divides this under two headings : 
(1) Pushpa-Sakatika and (2) nirmita-jfiana. His commentator, YaSodhara, 
simply says that ; 
geartir fifritacaré sot | 
Jiva-gosvamin reads it as Pushpa-Sakatikd-nimitta-jiidnam, but fails to explain it 
qeraafeatirar FerSateerat fafa | 
Sridhara-svamin reads it as: 
gorapleniatataarrs | 
SHAM ATI TTT! Tt A mexfrariy | Tera fea 14 
IAT sft arTTSaATAT ASAT Sle | fafraaafatr Aaa | 
© aarat isffarat aearat areteer (a area) Saree (1) ae PRATT 
15 


INTRODUCTION HINDU ARCHITEC TURE ty 


54. Dhadrana-matrika\—The art of composing enigmatic 
According to YaSodhara it refers to a kind of science of 
bering.? 

55. Sampathya—According to Yagodhara it refers to akind of 
reading which is practised for the sake of music and debate, 

56. Manasi kavya-kriya—Extempore and mental Composition of 
versified poetry. The art comprises the filling up of stanzas of 
which a portion is told, the versification of thoughts in Someone 
else’s mind, and composing verses beginning with certain given 
letters, etc. 

57. Abhidhana-kosa Lexicography. The art consists in getting 
together all the synonyms of a term. 

58. Chhando-jndna—Knowledge of metres. The art consists in 
composing metrical verses. But according to Yagodhara it refers 
to character-reading, especially of man by young ladies.4 

59. Kriydvikalpa—Derivation and conjugation of verbs in various 
ways. It refers to grammar and poetics, as Yagodhara says. 

60. Chhalitaka-yoga—Tricks. According to Yagodhara the art 
Consists in assuming by one the form of somebody else in: order to 
deceive someone, as Sirpanakha and Kichaka did.® 

61. Vastra-gopana—Changing the appearance of fabrics, such as 
making cotton cloth appear like silk. But according to Yasodhara 
the art consists rather in concealing by cloth the very existence of 
certain private parts of the body, putting on a torn piece of 
cloth in such a manner that it looks perfect, and wearing a long 
piece of cloth in skilful folding so that it appears small.® 


1 Vallabhacharya and Sridhara-svamin read this along with the preceding one 
under the same heading, 


2IT TAT TOT TL aa — 


Poetry, 
remem.- 


TY PAT cet Sete Hala 
gat AUT: Tae ay: 
2 ava AaTASA | TATA as Tole, fedtreaaTTaaS aa ae aaa TOE | 


“ge gaaa et aay was Ta: ef areas wee aT 
sae Una fe aT | 


SAAT Aa Test TIT AN 
feet ioran wattage: | 
olararfract far aa FT PraRy \|_ —(Quotations from some unnamed work.) 
S aaa daTr TIT TITATALY TeHTATafa | afemeafeaeda TATA 
Weal AAT TATA HLT I 


16 


INDIA AND ABROAD FINE ARTS 


62. Dyita-visesha—The art of various gamblings. 

63. Aksha-krida—Playing with dice, mentioned as a special game 
by YaSodhara. Jiva-gosvamin refers this to an unspecified game in 
which a distant object is drawn in. 

64. Bdla-kridanaka—The art of making dolls for children. Ac- 
cording to a modern translator (Mitra) it refers to juvenile sports. 
65. Vainayikt-jidna—The art of etiquette, as Yagodhara says.” 

66. Vijaytki-jndna—Art of warfare , including archery, etc. Accord- 
ing to Yasodhara, it admits of two varieties, divine and human. 

67. Vydyamiki-jianat—The art of physical exercises, including 
hunting and other sports, as stated by Yosodhara.® 

From this list it is clear that under some headings more than one 
subject is discussed, that some subjects should better be discussed 
under one heading, and that the order is not logical. In fact, the 
number of arts as sixty-four is a fictitious one. Neither Vatsyayana, 
nor all the commentators of the Kama-sitra, nor those of the Srimad- 
bhaga-vata, nor the author of the Lalita-vistara have been able to make 
up the number. Some of the commentators admit this.® In the Uttara- 
dhyana-sittra the number given, as pointed out above, is seventy-two, 
which are not, however, specified. YaSodhara declares that the 
sixty-four are the basic arts, which may be subdivided into five hun- 
dred and eighteen.’ These basic arts are classified under different 
groups in an unspecified text (of the Kama-sitra). Of these, twenty- 
four are stated to be the useful arts® ; twenty refer to gambling, of 


1 As a matter of fact this and the former item should come under one heading. 

2 CAAT TNS SAMA SATATAMTEAT AMT SEATS ARTA 

8 farts aciftaa: | Seal AST) Tar Seal Teafsaes: | ATMA aT: ata 
Frey: area fare: | 

4 Both Sridhara-svamin and Suka-deva read it as Vaitaliki. 


5 SqTaTfarat ATA : | 


Safad aor: acrdfediadt: git saataerakenet: qatateem: WaT 
TM SCATAMAT AMANITA T TNT: AAT Cary : |_(Jiva-gosvamin): 


qalat at tarercaar: FafaqMrEAt: |—(Vallabhacharya), 
7 agattedenen: | rretarecrcferfarserrarr pec TTT TAATT TTT | 
silat, TAA, ae, feftaray, tat ater, faafatet:, Gere, TIesay, AleT- 
fafr:, areqrerfaerra, cre, era, Cara, STALL AT, arafate:, ASAT, 
frente kaaadd, ATSUSHI, ASTHATOY, STATA, TAA, ale 
Tiweae:, fasakeoate | , 
17 


INTRODUCTION HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


which fifteen deal with theoretical things* and five with practical 
objects?; and sixteen are concerned with cohabitation® and four 
with subsidiary matters connected with cohabitation.* The last 
twenty are entirely private matters and are never meant for public 
discussion; they are too fine to be exhibited in a museum for 
fine arts, although indecent paintings of the sort are noticed in 
temples at Puri, Kanarak, Benares and elsewhere; they are stated 
to be practised in private.® 

So far as the main list is concerned, it should be noticed, only 
the last twenty may be considered as exclusively feminine arts, the 
others from vocal music down to physical exercise being equally 
practised both by males and females. Even cookery, which includes 
the scientific preparation of all kinds of dishes and beverages, is a 
proper subject for the theoretical and practical study for man and 
woman alike. In fact, dietary is a section of the medical science. An- 
other fact to which attention should be drawn is that barely one- 
fourth of the whole list can be called fine arts, which are meant only 
for mere culture or amusement, while others are really useful and 
productive arts both materially and culturally. This point is beauti- 
fully illustrated by Vatsyayana in his Kdma-siira : ‘ Even an ordinary 
dancing girl possessing beauty and youth when trained in these arts 
rises to the status of a courtesan, is welcomed in respectable society, 
and is respected by kings and learned people. She becomes an object 
of notice and is desired by everybody. As regards princesses and 
daughters of high officials, they can keep captivated their husbands 
possessing a thousand other wives. And when they become widows 


Laat faafa:) a fasifa: teae—aranfta:, wafer, sTasea, fear 
TT, A, Ta, aOTe, Frfsafate:, weahe:, Gearfrer:, fea, 
atioaentt:, airar:, SHA, Teale | 

2 aailal: A—SreaIale:, TaH, VIM, HA, Aaa slat | 

8 TATA: SAGA ATMS, CATT RAATH, WETS, TASRTAVATE:, 
falar, Te FR, Talked, soe, aaa sada 
ATMS, FSA, TAA, FANT, T(r) aheawT:, ACA 


SATe TATA GT ATE, Sata, TaAaTAT, FA: GAs 
friansata | 
° IRSA AG ae AT Far WANA | 
—(Vatsyayana, Chap. III). 
18 


INDIA AND ABROAD FINE ARTS 


and deprived of their wealth they can honourably earn their liveli- 
hood even in another country. A man who is a skilful artist can com- 
mand a-hearing and proves a pleasant companion everywhere. 
Even being a stranger he can captivate the heart of young ladies in 
no time. Prosperity follows him in all places and at all times.’2 

Lastly, none of these arts can be properly cultivated by a person, 
community, or nation who is not endowed with a sense of beauty 
and youth. In this matter age is no sure test of youth. The Great 
Buddha could renounce the world while yet a young man and in 
the midst of worldly prosperity because he had grown oldish in heart 
and had no interest for youth and beauty. Almost at the same age 
Chaitanya also renounced the world, but he was never deprived of 
a sense of beauty and youth, and the result has been the origin of 
Sankirtana, a kind of very exciting mass music, as well as the estab- 
lishment of Nava-dvipa, and later Vaishnavism, where many of the 
erotic arts developed under different garbs with a tinge of religion. 
On the other hand, poets like Rabindranath and others write 
highly erotic poems and love stories in their sixties and seventies, 
because, in spite of their age, they have kept alive an interest for 
beauty and youth in their heart. In fact, beauty and youth need 
not always be dependent upon a well-proportioned figure or any 
particular complexion or upon a particular age. 

* Youth is not a time of life; itis astate of mind. It is not a matter 
of ripe cheeks, red lips and supple knees; it is a temper of the will, a 
quality ofthe imagination, a vigour of the emotions. It is the freshness 


1 atreaiesar aa ateenntaad | 
oad wired aT FT Tale I 
qfsrat at Aer Cat Praises AGA | 
SAAS A SATIT A ATA HI 
AMA UTA FT ASAT TAT | 
AAA Karat Fat TTA UI 
aa fafaant A Tat STR TAT | 
Sareaeste faenfa: a Gaaa silatet 1 
AL: HOTT FAG AATSLATSHTL: | 
agaist arent Fras farater 
SOM TTA AAPATTSTAT | 
Sqarsl CAAT HAVT: AFA AT I 

—(Kama-sitra, Chap. III). 


“ 


INTRODUCTION HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


of the deep springs of life. Youth means a See ee aeatee predomi- 
nance of courage over timidity, of the appetite tor a a Over 
the love of ease. This often exists in a man of fifty more t oa in a boy 
of twenty. Nobody grows old by merely living a number of years, 
People grow old only by deserting their ideals. Years wrinkle the 
skin ; but to give up enthusiasm wrinkles the soul. Worry, doubt, 
self-distrust, fear and despair—these are the long long years that bow 
the heart and turn the greening spirit back to doubt. Whether sixty 
or sixteen, there is in every human being’s heart the lure of wonder, 
the sweet amazement at the stars and at the starlike things and 
thoughts, in undaunted challenge of events, the unfailing, child-like 
appetite for what next, and the joy of the game of living. You are 
as young as your faith; as old as your doubt ; as young as your self- 
confidence; as old as your fear; as young as your hope; as old as 
your despair. J 

‘In the central place of your heart there is an evergreen tree, its 
name is Love. So long as it flourishes, you are young. When it 
dies, you are old. In the central place of your heart there is a wireless 
station, so long as it receives messages of beauty, hope, cheer, gran- 
deur, courage and power from the earth, from men and from the in- 
finite, so long are you young. When the wires are down, and all 
the central place of your heart is covered with snows of cynicism and 
the vice of pessimism, then you are grown old, even at twenty.’ 

Youth and beauty are an embodiment of what is called the 
sensual love. And love is the real life which is the source of all 
activities and of all arts. Life is, however, impossible without a 
body. Hence beauty and youth can be realized only with reference 
to an idol, an image, or a symbol. 

Buddhism at its origin was a religion of renunciation. Buddha 
himself was not attracted to his young wife, newly-born baby 
boy, old parents, and an extensive kingdom and other royal pros- 
perities. Buddhism itself required no idol to worship and needed 
no temple. Hence Buddhism has given rise, in architecture, for 
instance, to heaps of stone known as stupa. ‘These topes, the real 
oi my te peer oe a 
ae elics and never intended to 
be artistic. No doubt they are found surrounded with beautiful stone 
railings and decorated with artistic gateways; but these were 
obviously incongruous with the original tumulus and m 

ust have been 
20 


INDIA AND ABROAD FINE ARTS 


later additions. They formed no essential parts of the main structure, 
just like the other accessories, such as stone umbrellas, elaborately 
carved pillars, and abundant statuary, usually in the form of reliefs, 
representing scenes connected with their religions. They show the 
conversion of Buddhism and Jainism to idolatry and point to the 
period from whence the Buddhist and the Jain arts made their 
appearance. 

Muhammadanism grew up in the Arabian desert. It is not a 
religion of renunciation, but it is non-idolatrous ; hence there is no 
need for a temple; prayer could be said anywhere. Consequently 
the mosque does not represent any symbolic idea. It has been right- 
ly stated that the Muhammadans ‘ designed like giants and their 
Hindu workmen finished like jewellers ; but from the giant killed 
by Jack, right through the whole genus, giants have hitherto been 
noted for . . . immense strength.’ There is no room for any 
sculpture. Worship is congregational, but there is no need for music, 
which is considered to be a disturbance rather than an incentive 
to the worshippers in concentrating the mind upon one object. Priests 
are householders, but the God of daily worship is impersonal. Thus 
it is not a religion of love, rather one of obedience. The sensual 
love, however, embodies in itself beauty and youth without which no 
fine art can grow. Hence Muhammadanism could not give rise to 
many fine arts. It is, however, a fact that the Muslims have later 
on developed many arts, but that is due to their war-like spirit, their 
militarism, and not to their religion. The wonderful Taj Mahal is a 
secular monument of love for a beautiful wife. The great forts at 
Agra, Delhi, and other places were but military settlements. The 
famous Mugha! paintings have no religious tinge about them. The 
Quran is composed in prose and is not a book of poetical hymns like 
the Bible or the Vedas. In fact, both Arabic and Persian poetry is 
predominantly secular. 

Christianity, on the other hand, is a religion of love. Christ 
himself was born of extreme love of youth for beauty, and gave up 
his life under highly romantic circumstances. It is fundamentally 
a religion which cannot be practised in the absence of an idol, an 
image, or a symbol. Christ is idolized in every church, together 
with the cross, which was the deadly weapon upon which he was 


1 General A. Cunningham, Archaelogical Survey Reports, Vol. TV, pp. 56-57: 
al 


INTRODUCTION HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


crucified. Idol-worship needs a temple. Hence the Christian form 
of worship is impracticable without the church or a chapel. Like 
Muhammadanism, it is also congregational, but, unlike the former, ut 
is performed with music in an atmosphere of beauty ; the church is 
neatly arranged and the worshippers keep a fashionable dress for the 
Sunday or Church day. Its priests are householders ; they can 
eat all things, they can amuse themselves in all possible ways, even 
in hunting, gambling, drinking and dancing. In other words, it 
is full of life and vigour; beauty and youth reign supreme in it. 
Thus the Christian churches of almost all ages and in all countries 
were lovingly conceived and beautifully executed. The Grecian 
gods and goddesses were vigorously carved and were always given 
a youthful and beautiful appearance. Young boys (and girls) in 
pretty uniform are required to sing psalms from the Bible in chorus. 
In painting, the romantic incidents connected with Christ played a 
great part. Greek, Latin, French, English, German, Russian, all 
literature of the followers of Christ is full of their mythological 
allusions. Poetry, lyric, drama, all are based mainly on the theme 
of beauty and youth. Vigorous and lively music is necessary every- 
where in the church, for the funeral, in the battle-field, for a 
dinner-party, for the dancing hall, etc. Cookery or perfumery, 
jugglery or mimicry, weaving or tailoring, bull-fighting or hunting, 
in every art of the Christian world there is evinced a real life. The 
theme in all these arts is that of beauty and youth. 

Hinduism combines in itself, at different stages of its development, 
the renunciation and respect for life of Buddhism, the stern discip- 
line and brotherhood of Muhammadanism, and the love and life 
of Christianity. The inactive God beyond the conception of mind 
and word is impersonal, but the active God of worship is idolized to 
an extreme. In the early Vedic stage God is personified in natural 
phenomena ; then He is given a human body till at last He is con- 
ceived as having a thousand heads, a thousand eyes, a thousand 
arms, and so on. 

Thus we see in the Pauranic age Brahma is furnished with 
four heads, Siva and other deities with three eyes, the goddess 
Durga or Sakti, ie. the personified energy, with ten hands 
holding various attributes, and the goddess of learning with a 
musical instrument. In the dhvanas, 


af: or descriptions of various 
deities, 


all their characteristic features and qualifications are 
22 


INDIA AND ABROAD eee 


elaborately referred to. In these descriptions one feature, which 
is practically common to all the gods and goddesses, is that they 
are conceived atthe height of their beauty. This is applicable not 
only to the goddess of love or wealth, but also to the goddess of 
fury or terror. 

Temples had already been erected when God was fully idolized. 
But the priest who renounced the world, or went to the forest in his 
old age accompanied by his old wife alone, needed neither temple 
nor idol ; he went on meditating on the impersonal God. The greater 
majority of priests, however, remain householders, enjoying life in 
all possible ways in an atmosphere of beauty and youth. Even in 
the early Vedic stage a worshipper had to be accompanied by, what 
is called in English, his better half. No religious observance would 
be complete unless one is accompanied by his wife. Rama had to be 
accompanied by a golden image of Sita for the performance of his 
horse-sacrifice in celebration of his suzerainty. And all possible 
phases and aspects of the conception of God were idolized. Thus 
Hinduism has given rise to an unparalleled pantheon and my- 
thology. There is the god for creation, god for preservation, god for 
destruction. There is the god of death, there is the god of love; 
there is the god of war. There is a god for the fisherman, a god for 
the weaver, a god for the trader, a god for the hunter. All this 
statuary symbolizes the self-expression of youth in as beautiful a 
body as an artist can conceive. Sculpture being the handmaid 
of architecture such a variety of deities necessarily needed equally 
diversified types of temples, of which, though the ancient remains 
are not too numerous, there are convincing proofs in all branches 
of our literature, especially in the Vastu-Sastras. Buildings have been 
distinguished as male, female, and neuter; as round, oval, rectan- 
gular, quadrangular, octagonal and of other shapes ; as running to 
seventeen storeys ; as having ninety-eight, forty-five, twenty, and ten 
types ; as being high like the Himalayas; white like the swan, etc.* 
In the words of Fergusson, ‘it will undoubtedly be conceded by those 
who are familiar with the subject that, for certain qualities, the 
Indian buildings are unrivalled ; and that they display an exuber- 
ance of fancy, a lavishness of labour, and an elaboration of detail 
to be found nowhere else.” What remains to be added to this general 


1 See infra, pp. 186-196 ; the writer’s Dictionary of Hindu ana Y ist Ed. 
pp- 830, 831, and the Encyclopaedia of Hindu Architecture, under Prasada. 


23 


INTRODUCTION HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


characteristic is that Hindu architecture, much like sculpture, good, 
bad, or indifferent, was always inspired by a sensual love and executed 
3 


i t here of beauty and youth. ‘tae 
ier Vedas: which are the fundamental scriptures of Hinduism, 


have been recognized as first-class poetic productions, full of life, 
vigour and beauty. Thus the Hindu mind could not think but in 
poetry. Excepting the commentaries and explanatory notes as re- 
presented by the Brahmanas, the Siiras, and one or two other branches 
of literature, poetry has been the vehicle of OSHA everywhere 
else, including lexicons, law-books, political SO TEnSee, astronomy, 
mathematics, medicine, architecture, sculpture, painting, singing, 
dancing, even histories, not to speak of epic works, lyrics and dramas. 
Poetry can be woven only by the hand of youth in an atmosphere of 
beauty, whatsoever might be its nature, whatsoever might be its sub- 
ject-matter and whatsoever might be its leading sentiment, either of 
love or laughter, pathetic or furious, heroic or terrible, expressing 
disgust or wonder, filial affection or spiritual resignation. Human 
love has always been a theme of Hindu poetry. 

Poetry and music became almost identical at a very early stage ; 
one of the scriptures is called a book of chants. Without music 
the Hindu life is impossible: it is necessary for wedding, for 
christening a child, for initiation, for amusement and for mourning, 
at birth and at death, for war and for peace. All music is but a 
beautiful expression of a heart full of youthful enthusiasm. 

Although the arts like architecture, sculpture, poetry and music 
had their origin in the religion of the Christians and the Hindus in 
connexion with the form of worship, which is based on love, these 
arts, along with the others of the above list, became later entirely 
secular, and developed in various ways. In the Kama-sitra the arts 
have nothing to do with religion. Their object is neither salvation 
(moksha) nor ritualistic observances (dharma), but merely the gratifi- 
cation of material desires and sensual love. Cookery or perfumery, 
dancing or singing, painting or powdering, jugglery or physical 
exercise, gardening or weaving is undertaken to earn money or to 
enjoy oneself. This fact, as noticed above, has been repeatedly 
pointed out by the commentator Yagodhara. In fact, material desires 
and sensual love canbe nourished only by those who consider them- 
selves ever young and immortal; in other words, no artistic matter 
can be cultivated by those who are in the grasp of death and decay. 


24, 


INDIA AND ABROAD fin ARTS 


Countries or nations deprived of a sense of beauty and youth 
for some reason or other could not give rise to many fine arts. 
While in the full bloom of her youth and beauty Africa, for 
instance, could think of erecting monumental pyramids and ape 
of devisiug means to preserve the perishable dead bodies in the form 
of mummies ; but since life and love have been taken out of her 
there has been no artistic effort or expression in any way. The 
Grecian statuary no longer shows its former life and vigour, 
beauty and youth. The famous colossal buildings at Borobudur 
were built but once. The weavers of Bengal, who once manufac- 
tured the finest muslin in the world, could no longer be induced 
to produce even khdadi. 

So far as Hindu India of the past is concerned all the five hundred 
and eighteen arts, of which a mere mention is made, might not have 
been equally developed, but many of them, in the neighbourhood 
of a few hundred, did undoubtedly reach the status of a fully 
developed science and can each claim a Silpa-Sastra. The revival 
of the Silpa-sdstras would revive our art consciousness. The un- 
earthing of our artistic treasures and unfolding of their worth 
and beauty may bring back life and love in us, and awaken 
that youthful artistic instinct which is our precious inheritance. 
Biggest fruits and best flowers can grow only in the healthiest 
young plants on a fertile soil. 

In this volume an endeavour has been made ‘ to be quite certain of 
our data,’ so far as Hindu architecture in India and Abroad is 
concerned, and ‘to place the monumental records with a faithful 
interpretation before the learned world exactly as they now exist.’ 


25 


PLATE XII2 


GENERAL VIEW, NORTHERN SECTION, LOOKING SOUTH-EAST, MOHENJO-DARO Page 2 
> ? ’ 


CHAPTER I 
PRE-VEDIC ARCHITECTURE 


MOoHENJO-DARO 


[HE TERM ‘ MoueEnj O-DARO * is translated as the ‘ Mound of the 
Dead.’ Why it is so called is not yet known. The place is locally 
known as ‘ the island.’ It is ‘a long, narrow strip of land between 
the main river (Indus) bed and the Western Nara loop, its precise 
position being 27° 19’ N. by 68° 8’ E., some 7 miles by road from 
Dokri on the North-Western Railway, and 25 from Larkana town. 
There are stated to have been several cities, one being superimposed 
upon the other. The remains of the uppermost city were hid by the 
mounds, averaging from 20 to 70 feet in height. ‘The actual area 
covered by the mounds. is now no more than about 240 acres.’! 
‘ Originally, the site of Mohenjo-daro must have been much more 
extensive than it is today and have formed a more closely connected 
whole.”2 ' 

There is a main road, designated by the excavator as East Street, 
which runs across the site from east to west. There is another long 
street, but less important as the thoroughfare of the city, which 
crosses East Street at right angles and thus runs from north to south 
and is designated as First Street. ‘From these two long streets, 
as well as from the short sections of others disclosed in other parts 
of the site, it is evident that the city was intersected by long streets or 
approximately straight thoroughfares mainly oriented north to south 
or east to west ; and it is natural to suppose that one of these thorough- 
fares—perhaps the most important of them all—ran north to south 
through the broad depression which divides the St#pa Mound from 
the rest of the site, in a line parallel to First Street and connecting at 
right angles with East Street.’? The main thoroughfares are all 
below the level of the buildings erected alongside of them. 

The extent of ground covered by this city at SUCCESSIYe periods is 
not definitely known, but it is clear that “once it must have ieee 
well beyond the existing limits.’ Sir John Marshall, disagreeing ts 
Mr. Mackay, asserts that the city must have been surrounde ¥E 
walls. But it may be ‘assumed that up to the time of its zent 


: 2 bid, p. 8 
* Mohenjo-daro and Indus Civilization, Vol. 1, p. 1. Ibid, P 


27 


PRE-VEDIC ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 
Mohenjo-daro went on steadily expanding, its centre would naturally 
continue to occupy the elevated ground formed by earlier settlements, 
while its outlying parts would overflow further and further on to the 


plain below.”? 
Between the subsoil and the summits of the mounds remains of 


seven strata have been disclosed. The three last strata are distinguished 
from their predecessors ‘ by increasing signs of decadence in the size 
and construction of the buildings, and in some areas there is also a 
well defined break between the remains of the third and fourth strata 
from the top, as if the city had been reduced to ruin at that time 
and remained in that condition for an appreciable period before being 
rebuilt.’ ‘Of the seventh stratum only a very small extent has been 
uncovered, but the distinction of this and the sixth stratum is more 
than usually marked.’ These seven strata have been divided into 
three major divisions or periods. The first of these comprising the 
first, second and third strata is called the ‘ Late Period’; the second 
comprising the fourth, fifth and sixth strata is called the ‘ Intermediate 
Period’; and the third represented for the present by the seventh 
stratum only is called the ‘ Early Period.’? 

The layout of the whole city of any one of these periods or strata 
is thus missing from the account of Sir John Marshall and others, 
A provisional picture may, however, be imagined by joining up 
the various sections or areas as described by them. The city would 
thus look of irregular shape, the longer side in some cases being from 
north to south, and in others from east to west. The streets and 
lanes, however, are nearly straight. By the intersections of these the 
city is divided into different blocks. The central part appears to 
have been occupied by some public building or the Great Bath. 
Each block contained a number of buildings for the residence of the 
people of the same profession. The streets and lanes are all below 
the level of the buildings on their both sides, There appears to have 
been an extensive arrangement for drainage—a peculiarity which 
is strongly emphasized in the Manasdra and other Stlpa-sastras. The 
general city plan, excepting the irregularity, will also correspond to 
some extent to the plans elaborately described in the architecture 
of Manasara. 

As in other ancient pre-historic sites, buildings at Mohenjo-daro 
have been discovered in different strata. The loftiest mound rising 


1 Mohenjo-daro and Indus Civilization, Vol. I, p. Q: 2 Ibid, p. 10. 
28 


{NDIA AND ABROAD 


MOHENJO-DARO 


some 72 above the surrounding country (and 227 feet above the 
mean cs evel) is crowned by the Buddhist tope and monastery. 
Below this earliest Buddhist pavement the lowest point so far reached 
goes down to a depth of 4o feet. Within this space seven different 
strata have been exposed, each stratum containing different kinds of 
structures built of kiln-burnt bricks. 

The Buddhist monuments at the top of the uppermost stratum 
comprise an open quadrangle with a lofty tope in its middle and 
rows of monastic buildings enclosing it on the four sides. These 
monuments, including the tope, courtyard, and surrounding monastery, 
are stated to have been many times repaired or rebuilt ‘on each 
occasion at a successively higher level. Thus the original pavement 
of the courtyard was 20 feet below the bottom of the stipa drum, or 
44 feet approximately above the level of the plain (and 199 feet above 
the mean sea-level). The next floor was 1 to 2 feet above it, and then 
followed a succession of at least three more floors, the last nearly 6 
feet higher than the original one.” 

The general plans and details of these buildings follow those of the 
usual Buddhist monuments. But the séipa is not situated in the 
centre of the quadrangle. The symmetry has been lost as the dis- 
tance between the stipa platform and the surrounding cells on the 
four sides is different, being 224 feet on the north, 20 feet on the 
south, 12 and 14 feet on the west, and 34 feet on the east. ‘The reason 
for this unusual want of symmetry is stated to be due to this building 
being erected first on this site and the courtyard and monastery being 
added later on the restricted space available on the summit of the 
mound. 

‘ Measured from the first pavement to the base of the drum the 
height of the plinth is 20 feet. . . . The approach to it was in the 
middle of its eastern side, and was more than ordinarily elaborate. 
It consisted of a series of steps and landings which led upwards 
into a narrow vestibule. . . . On the opposite side of this vestibule 
was a short passage, from which two flights of steps ascended 
north and south to the top of the platform ; and closing the passage, 
at its western end was a small image-chapel, or a niche, which 
appears to have been 3? feet above the pavement of the passage. 
This image-niche (7 feet deep by 43 feet wide) occupies a particularly 


1 Mohenjo-daro and Indus Civilization, Vol. I, p. 113. 
29 


PRE-VEDIC ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE In 


prominent position, being directly opposite to, though slightly above, 
the approaching stairway. In it Mr. Banerji found some remains of 
a statue of Buddha, seated cross-legged, probably on a lotus throne. 
The core of the image, he says, was of brick covered with a coating of 
mud, which had originally been painted or gilt,’? 

All that is left of the dome of the stipa is the lower part of the cir- 
cular drum of 334 feet in diameter. This drum was probably hollow 
in the centre, wherein a relic casket of alabaster has been found. 
‘The fragments of plaster found on the western side of the plinth 
were coloured blue, yellow, red, and chocolate, and bore traces of 
figures and decorative designs, as well as fragmentary inscriptions 
in Brahmi and Kharoshthi. Among the latter Mr. Banerji recognized 
the word Samana (Skt. Sramana) in lettering of the Kushan epoch, 
but whether of the early or late part of it, is disputable.” 

Grouped about the main stdpa in the courtyard there were several 
smaller stipas. There are series of cells and other apartments on all 
the four sides of the courtyard, all built like the stipa, of kiln-burnt 
brick laid in mud and gypsum, as many of the pre-historic build- 
ings were. Sir John Marshall assumes ‘on the analogy of other 
monasteries of the Kushan period’ that ‘ they (cells) possessed 
two storeys with a wooden verandah in front—facing inwards towards 
the courtyard—which would serve at once to shield them from the 
sun and provide access to the chambers on the upper floor. The 
roof would be carried on timbers and covered with mud, with a 
slight slope inwards towards the court.°2 

“The entrance to the monastery was on the east side of the quad- 
rangle directly opposite the steps leading up to the stupa. Here there 
was a vestibule 254 feet by 1 32 feet. To the north of this vestibule 
there is a small chapel. On the floor of the chapel were two separate 
pavements of brick, corresponding to those in the large halls as well 
as in many of the cells.2 To the north of this chapel there is a 
long narrow chamber containing a staircase to the upper storey, 
where the monk quarters were situated. The large hall (44 feet by 26 
feet), supposed to be a Hall of Assembly, a usual adjunct in the larger 
monasteries, is situated to the north-east corner beyond the staircase. 
The second large hall (41 feet by 22 feet), adjoining the entrance 
vestibule on the south, is entered from the courtyard by a doorway 


" Mohenjo-daro and Indus Civilization, Vol. I, PP. 114-115. ? Ibid, pp. 116-117. 


go 


ae ie 


SoME SUBSTANTIALLY BUILT STRUCTURES IN THE CENTRE OF EasT TRENCH, MOHENJO-DARO 


PLATE XIV(a) 


at 


PLATE XIV(b) 


00) rt ee 
a 
, q ae 


pa aie cd 
See 


INDIA AND ABROAD MOHENJO-DARO 


(54 feet wide), with two steps on the inner side. It might have been 
used aS'a COmmon room or refectory. 

‘Thus on the east side of the monastery there were two large 
common rooms, an entrance vestibule, image shrine, and staircase 
leading to the upper storey. On the other three sides were the quarters 
of the monks. The majority of these comprised two apartments— 
an inner one for sleeping and an outer one for living purposes.”? 

Of the seven strata, the first is represented by three walls, a square 
floor of brick, ‘ probably the floor of a bath room,’? near the south- 
east corner of the Buddhist courtyard. ‘The second and the third 
strata contain portions of four buildings with a narrow lane between 
them and a number of more or less disconnected walls. One of these 
buildings is a well-built edifice of considerable size and is distinguished 
by the presence of a number of small paved bathrooms and parti- 
cularly well-made drains, which suggests that it was mainly devoted 
to the bathing purposes and formed a part of the large hydropathic 
establishment to which the great bath and other structures on the 
west.also belong. The fourth stratum contains a number of chambers 
at the north-west corner of the monastery, some fragments of walling 
a little to the north of them, a single wall running east to west on 
the east side of the stdpa, and two other walls. The fifth stratum 
is represented only by sections of two walls. One of these walls, 
from east to west, is situated at a depth of 13 to 17 feet below the 
Buddhist. pavement. The other is a massive and finely built piece of 
walling, nearly 7 feet thick, pierced by an opening and provided on 
its southern face with-an offset. It appears to have belonged to a 
building of importance. To the sixth stratum belong two small 
fragments of walling, one partly beneath the massive wall of the 
fifth stratum and the other near the north-west corner of the stupa. 
The seventh stratum is represented only by a low wall and adjacent 
pavement in the deep trench outside the north-west corner of the 
monastery.”? 

The buildings discovered at the different strata at Mohenjo-daro 
may be.-classified under the following heads: (1) dwelling-houses, 
(2) public baths of religious or secular character, (3) temples of 

some kind, and (4) raised platforms, possibly tombs. 

‘The houses varied much in size. ‘The smallest, which may have 
been intended for menials’ quarters, had no more than two rooms. 


1 Mohenjo-daro and Indus Civilization, Vol. I, p. 119. 2 Jbid, p. 125. ° Ibid, p. 127. 
31 


PRE-VEDIC ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


The largest are on a scale that entitles them to be ranked almost 
as palaces or temples. One of the upper class houses has a frontage 
of 85 feet and a depth of 97 feet. Its surrounding walls are 4 to 5 
feet in thickness and have a slight batter on the outside. Against 
its east and west sides other houses have been built. The front of 
the house was towards a quiet lane, and the entrance on this side 
measured nearly 10 feet across, afterwards narrowed to 76 inches 
by the insertion of an extra pier against the east jamb. Opposite 
the entrance is the porter’s lodge, which is connected with an out- 
side courtyard by a doorway almost as wide as the chamber itself, 
so that there might be no possibility of the occupant being hidden 
from view. To the right of the porter’s lodge, a short passage led to 
the central courtyard of the house, which was open to the sky and 
provided light and air to the rooms grouped about it on both the 
ground and upper floors. The courtyard measures approximately 
32 feet square, but the square is not a true one. Like other open 
courtyards it was paved with brick and provided with a covered 
drain. Of the rooms which encompass the courtyard, the one at 
the south-west corner contains a well and is entered up three steps 
from the passage near the vestibule. There is an apperture between 
it and the bathroom for conveying the well water direct into the 
bathroom. These bath- and the well-rooms are situated on the south 
side of the courtyard. Small rooms of irregular shape, numbering 
four, run along the east side of the courtyard. On the west side of 
the courtyard there is a curious chamber with a narrow exterior 
passage and having four niches in the inside walls. On the north of 
the courtyard there are three chambers which appear to be a northern 
projection of the house. The living- and the sleeping-rooms of the 
family were all on the upper floor, which was reached from the 
courtyard by way of the staircase. One of them and the passage- 
ways are raised up on a solid basement (in order to provide against 
the menace of floods, the idea being to have at least one fair-sized 
room where the family could find refuge if the rest of the house 
collapsed). The remainder of the upstairs rooms were disposed round 
about the central courtyard, following no doubt the same plan as the 
rooms below, but with a projecting balcony overhanging the court- 
yard from which the several rooms could be entered. The roof 
of this, as of most other buildings, was probably flat, and served as a 
terrace whereon the inmates of the house could sleep or take the 


32 


INDIA AND ABROAD MOHENJO-DARO 


ate ae ae oe house? has a more elaborate plan. 
ioe Hee ie oe ge ia fair-sized courts, ten smaller rooms; 
: » a porter’s lodge, and a well-chamber. The front is 
ee ae soe and here ae are three entrances side by side, 
al o i 
oi ee ns bt toll ae ee 
: y alongside the well at the rear 
of the house, which seems to have been originally open, but was 
subsequently bricked up. Entering the house by the main door 
one finds oneself in a small vestibule, with the porter’s lodge 
on the left and a second doorway directly opposite leading to the 
open court.? On the west side of it one of the three flights of steps 
ascends to the upper storey. On its south side is a broad brick pier, 
evidently intended for the support of the upper floor. On the north 
side of the court are three ornamental panels or recesses.”4 

‘To the left and right of this court are two other courts, one with 
its door communicating direct with First Street, the other with a 
small vestibule intervening between it and the street entrance. Of 
these two, the larger one, measuring about 25 feet in length, has a 
floor of brick-on-edge.”"* Sir John Marshall surmises that it was per- 
haps ‘ roofed over its western half only, its eastern half being left 
open to the sky.’* 

‘ The other apartments on this side of the house comprise the well- 
chamber at the far end and two other small rooms for menials. Cross- 
ing to the other side of the house, there are two smallish rooms, which 
for a time may have served as guest-chambers, but were subsequently 
bricked up and filled in solid as a precaution against floods. The 
tiny apartment next to them on the west was a latrine, from which a 
drain ran across the north side of the courtyard to a soak-pit in First 
Street, while in the wall of the latrine is the brick casing for a vertical 
pipe which descended from what was doubtless another latrine on 
the upper floor.’® 

From the small size of this latrine pipe Marshall concludes that 
it was meant to convey fluid only, not solids, and ‘this seems 


1 Mohenjo-daro and Indus Civilization, Vol. 1, pp. 17; 18, 19, 20. * Ibid, Plate VI. 

3°A feature of the porter’s lodge worth observing is the way in which the east 
wall has been built obliquely across it, so that the porter would be compelled to 
sit in full view of the entrance. The arrangement is at once clever and practical, 
and shows, like many other features, that the architect must have given a good deal 
of thought to the planning of this house.’ $25 

4 Mohenjo-daro and Indus Givilization, Vol. I, p. 20. Ibid, p. 21. 


33 ‘ 


PRE-VEDIC ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE In 


to be true of most of the house drains in Mohenjo-daro.’ But 
he discovered other * privies with seats (as to the character of 
which there can be no question) are directly connected with brick- 
drains of the usual type, which must therefore have been designed 


for sewage of any kind, solid or fluid.’4 
* There is a small hall which is entered from the further side of the 


lobby. Its north and east walls are relieved by a series of ornamental] 
recesses with single reveals. There appear to have been clerestory 
windows high up in the south wall. On this side there was a solid 
terrace, some 10 feet in height, abutting on to the hall, and windows 
with pierced lattice screens were contrived in the upper part of 
the wall. At the further end of this hall is the third and much Nnar- 
rower stairway leading to the upper floor, and alongside it another 
small room, above the doorway of which there was probably some 
sort of fanlight. All the remaining rooms on the ground floor are 
stated to have belonged to an older edifice, and were bricked up and 
filled in to form a solid terrace at the time when this house was 
built. 

“In all except the smallest dwellings at Mohenjo-daro a certain 
Portion of the ground floor,’ asserts Sir John Marshall, ‘ invariably 
took the form of a terrace or plinth sufficiently high and strong to 
resist the floods which annually menaced the city. ‘In this 
(second) of the larger houses the terrace thus constructed was some 
25 by 30 feet, and quite large enough to support two or three 
fair-sized chambers.’ 

“To imagine that all the upper apartments were confined to 
such terraces and that the architects made the latter solid, because 
they knew no other way of adding a second storey, is entirely 
fallacious. The architects of Mohenjo-daro,’ Marshall has no 
doubt, ‘knew as well as anyone how to erect two- or perhaps 
three-storeyed houses according to the usual methods—houses, 
that is to say, in which the upper floors corresponded in plan 
with the lower.?2 

‘ There is another group of buildings bounded on the east by First 
Street, and on the south by the First Lane. There are some five 
houses, four of which appear to be dwelling houses and the fifth one 

1 Mohenjo-daro and Indus Civilization, Vol. I, p. 24. Underground drains or sewers 
are frequently prescribed for larger houses in the Manasara and other Silpa-sastras ; 


also writer’s Dictionary of Hindu Architecture, 1st Ed., p. 209. 
3 [bid, p. 21. 


34 


INDIA AND ABROAD NOnEN|ORERG 


looks like a palace or a big temple. The first of these consists of only 
three rooms. The second one, immediately to the south of the first 
one, contains some seven rooms. The third house next door is a small 
structure consisting of only three rooms and they might have been a 
part of the second house. The fourth one was a larger building with a 
frontage of 62 feet. The fifth one was built in a block measuring 248 
feet from north to south by some 145 feet from east to west. As 
many as 136 rooms have been uncovered in this block and divided 
tentatively into nine separate buildings. Besides the courts and rooms, 
numbered from 37 to 60 and 70 to 84, it probably embraced various 
other courts and rooms.’ ‘ The spaciousness of its courts and general 
massiveness of construction,’ asserts Mr. Sahni, ‘ suggest that this 
building could not have been an ordinary private house.’! 

Sir John Marshall refers to a few more buildings of this type and 
comments, ‘whether these spacious and elaborate edifices were 
private houses or not, has yet to be determined. Quite conceivably,’ 
he asserts, ‘ some of them were temples.’ In support of his assertion 
he refers to a foreign analogy. ‘In Mesopotamia the temples of the 
gods were to all intents and purposes copies of the royal palaces— 
dwellings where a god could eat, drink, and make merry like any 
mortal prince, and even be wedded on occasions to his priestess.’ 
But there is no need to go to Mesopotamia for such an analogy, because 
in India itself (of the later times) there are numerous instances of 
temples fully described in the Silpa-Sastras like the Manasara, which 
possess as many as seven courts and look like gorgeous palaces. ‘ The 
first, second, fifth, and sixth of these buildings,’ continues Marshall, 
‘would have been specially appropriate for this purpose (as home for 
the gods), and it may be recalled,’ he further asserts, “ that in one of 
them the excavators found a series of those peculiar ringstones which 
we have good reason for believing were objects of cult-worship.”? 

This authoritative statement encourages Mr. Dayaram Sahni to 
say : ‘Et is gratifying to know that Sir John Marshall supports me 
in identifying them as phallic-emblems and the stone rings as their 
pedestals or Yonis.’ He endeavours to strengthen this conclusion by 
adding that, ‘ This view is further corroborated by the evidence of 
similar objects discovered by Sir Aurel Stein in the course of his recent 
archaeological expeditions in Baluchistan.’* But Sir John Marshall 


\ Mohenjo-daro and Indus Civilization, Vol. I, pp. 188, 189, 190. 
2 Ibid, p. 22. 3 [bid, p. 191. 


39 


PRE-VEDIC ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


safeguards his position by noting under the phalJic-emblem that < the 
cones referred to are differentiated by me from the so-called games- 
men. The former I regard as baetylic and the latter as phallic.°1 
Mr. Sahni fully describes the ringstones, the cones and the games- 
men: “There are eighteen large-sized stonerings with round tops 
and bottoms and differing in this respect from’ large undulating 
rings found at Harappa. The rings are 9 to ro inches high and 
carefully smoothed, all perforated in the middle,. the holes being 
4% to 9 inches in diameter and drilled in some cases from both sides. 
Some of them have shallow holes, neatly drilled cn either side of the 
central perforation, while others have in the same positions long 
rectangular grooves, possibly for metal clamps. A few of them 
are also drilled with lines of small cup-marks. There are two 
round stone caps with rounded tops which resemble the tops of 
the so-called gamesmen, of varying sizes, found both at Harappa and _ 
Mohenjo-daro. Other objects of the same class are the cones of 
stone, terra-cotta, etc., but without the projecting ring at the top. 
One cone of this type, 11 inches high, unearthed at Harappa, bears 
similarity to the Siva-Linga and it might have been fixed in a 
pedestal and worshipped in a tiny brick structure found close to it.’ 
With regard to the existence of a temple, private or public, and of 
emblems for worship, Sir John Marshall appears to have been in 
a fix. He can neither deny the implications of his own finds nor can 
he get rid of some kind of prejudice. Thus in the following quotation 
he appears to deny the very thing which he seems to believe. 
"All this, however, is sheer conjecture. Like the Minoans, the 
Indus people may have had no public shrines at ail, or if they had 
them, the shrines may have been wholly unlike their ordinary resi- 
dences. Among the buildings of Mohenjo-daro are several whose 
purpose we have not yet succeeded in discovering, and any one of 
these might have been a shrine as well as anything else.’? Then he 
refers to two buildings which bear all the essential features of a Hindu 
temple: ‘There is the little building containing two chambers, 
one much larger than the other with a corridor at the side, and there is 
the larger structure, which comprises a large central chamber with a 
corridor on its western and southern sides, a well and two other small 
chambers at its southern end, and a group of somewhat larger 


1 Mohenjo-daro and Indus Civilization, Vol. I, P- 191, note. 2 [bid, p. 22. 
36 


PLATE XV 


GENERAL VIEW FROM EAST AFTER EXCAVATIONS, HARAPPA Pag? 36 


PLATE XVI 


SEPULCHRES AT HARAPPA Page 37 


INDIA AND ABROAD HARAPPA 


chambers at its northern, the original plan of which is obscured beneath 


later accretions. Little unfortunately is left of this interesting ruin 
except its foundations, but these are unusually massive 
deep with a solid infilling of crude brick, and presuppose a corres- 

pondingly high superstructure, which might very well have taken the 

form of a corbelled skhara over the central apartment.’! 

One without a pre-conceived idea, but familiar with the common 
features of a Hindu temple, would feel no difficulty in identifying the 
above buildings as ordinary shrines, with a central room where a 
deity or an emblem is installed, with necessary side rooms and corri- 
dors, and, finally, surmounted with a Sikhara. 

Mr. R. D. Banerji, the explorer of Mohenjo-daro, ascribed these 
monuments, on the basis of hoards of square coins found therein, to 
the Maurya period, and inferred that ‘ the earliest floor was prior to 
the third century B.c. and the second prior to the second century 
B.c.’ Sir John Marshail would bring down these monuments by 
several centuries, saying that, ‘ the stipa may have been founded by 
one of the earlier Kushan kings, Kanishka or Huvishka, but in view 
of the conspicuous absence of any coins belonging to either of these 
kings in the monastery buildings, it is unlikely that the latter are 
older than the reign of Vasudeva I (a. p. 185—200).’ He would also 
differ from Mr. Banerji regarding the period of their occupation. 
The latter put it from 300 B. c. to A. D. 200, while the former would 
‘ vaguely ’ surmise and ‘ be on the safe side if, from start to finish, 
we place their history between A. D. 150 and 500.’ Sir John Marshall, 
however, has no doubt about the seven strata below these Buddhist 
monuments ‘ all belonging to the Chalcolithic period, and would 
assign the earliest and latest periods between ‘ 3250 B.G. to 2750 
Bice 


nearly 10 feet 


HARAPPA 


Harappa, on the old bed of the Ravi, is in the Montgomery District 
of the Punjab, south-west of Lahore, more than 400 miles north- 
west of Mohenjo-daro in the Larkana District of Sindh. The area isa 
wide one, nearly 2} miles in circumference, according to Cunningham, 
who visited it in 1833. The mounds, which rise conspicuously within 
this circuit, are of considerable elevation, the highest among them 
being 60 to 65 feet. 


1 Mohenjo-daro and Indus Civilization, Vol. I, p. 22. 2 Tbid, p. 106. 
37 


PRE-VEDIC ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE iN 


‘The site is manifestly of a great city covering a vast area and 
containing many strata of successive buildings.’ By a careful com- 
parison it has been found that the finds from Harappa and 
Mohenjo-daro belong to the same stage of culture and approxi- 
mately to the same age, third to fourth millennium B. c. Peoples of 
both these places ‘were living in well-built cities and were in 
possession of a relatively mature culture with a high standard of art 
and craftsmanship and a developed system of writing.’ 

General Cunningham records the fact that ‘the brick-remains 
within the mounds of Harappa had sufficed the contractors to ballast 
100 miles of the Lahore-Multan railroad, and it was apparent that 
most of the actual walling had thus been long ago removed.’? Most 
of the mounds marking the site were thus completely honey-combed 
with the diggings of the modern brick-hunters. The three which 
seem to have suffered least have been excavated. 

It has been determined that there are ‘ as many as seven successive 
layers of buildings, indicating a very prolonged occupation of the 
site’ ; no doubt there are other strata still unexposed below them. 
‘In the topmost stratum, which occurred at the depth of 13 feet from 
the summit of the mound, was revealed a round brick granary stand- 
ing about 6 feet high. The next three strata were devoid of any 
structural remains (though the lowest of them was packed with a 
large number of undulating stone rings of the same character as those 
described by General Cunningham). In the fifth stratum from the 
top two brick structures were observed. One of these is a square 
room with thick walls and paved interior which was divided into two 
smaller chambers at a later date. A narrow covered drain in its 
south wall and two low masonry benches on the inside seem to 
Point to its having been used as some sort of an image shrine. 

In this connexion it is interesting to observe that, at this very 
spot, has been found the defaced terra-cotta of a statuette which 
might have been an object of worship. The other structure found 
on this level is a confused mass of brick-remains in which a thick wall 


1 Sir John Marshall, Archaeological Survey Report for 1923-24, pp. 47, 48. 

2 Ibid, 1920-21, p. 50. 

® Still Sir John Marshall finds it difficult to say whether idol worship existed in 
those early times. Rai Bahadur Daya Ram Sahni, on the other hand, has quoted 
Marshall’s approval of the former’s identification of phallus at Harappa (Mohenjo- 
daro and Indus Civilization, Vol. I, p. 191). 


38 


INDIA AND ABROAD ae 


30 feet in length, resting partly on a solidly built platform, stands 
out prominently. A small square seal of white plaster dn eae 
preservation was sticking to this wall. The next lower stratum is 
represented by the somewhat better preserved structure which had 
been laid bare in this area and a number of tunnels left by the brick 
diggers. The seventh stratum will probably be found to be occupied 
by a building of considerable magnitude, though so far only a portion 
of its floor has been exposed. This floor consists of two courses of 
brick laid as stretchers and headers on a strong sub-stratum of pounded 
brick.’? 

Portions of walls have also been found at several places. Most 
of these belong to dwelling houses. One of them has been followed 
up for a length of about 18 feet. There were also two other 
walls running parallel to it on the other side. ‘ This, however, 
turned out to be all that had survived of the buildings. That the 
structure was an important one is evidenced by several interesting 
objects which came to light in it.* At another place have been 
discovered two thick walls running parallel to each other at a distance 
of about 2 feet. ‘They are broken at both ends and contain no 
openings or doors. These walls came to light at the depth of 11 
feet below the surface, but above them and intersecting them at right 
angles were two others that must be assigned to considerably later 
date. Two other trenches at this spot revealed a corner of a brick- 
building? in which two earthenware vessels containing human bones 
lay buried.’* 

A well-preserved water reservoir, lined with brick and provided 
with a narrow covered channel, has been found at a depth of 
about 8 feet. ‘ By the side of the tank was standing a large earthen 
jar with its pointed bottom fixed in the ground. It was filled with 
earth in which were several smaller jars and terra-cotta figurines. 
The exact purpose of the reservoir has not yet been ascertained.”® 


1 Archaeological Survey of India Report, 1923-24, PP- 53-54: 

2 Ibid, p. 52. ; $ OT sana 

3 Bricks at Harappa are of uniform size, 11 X54" X29" tog. 

4 Archaeological Survey of India Report, 1923-24, P- 53: * 

5 A similar tank found at Mohenjo-daro was thought by Mr. R. D. eae Ma 
a charanamrita kunda (a receptacle for the holy water used for the washing o ie 
sacred image). But Sir John Marshall hesitates to accept this ee 2 e 
is doubtful about idol worship being in vogue at Harappa and Mohenjo-daro 
(Ibid, p. 52). 


39 


PRE-VEDIC ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE In 


The other buildings brought to light are somewhat better pre- 
served and include ‘what appears to have been a temple with 
stout brick walls.’ There is another large-sized structure consisting 
of a double series of parallel walls without connecting walls of any 
kind. The exact purpose and nature of this building are not known. 
‘Like the highest mound at Mohenjo-daro, the summit of certain 
mounds at Harappa would appear in later times to have been 
occupied by certain Buddhist structures of which only small frag- 
ments, with a few terra-cotta panels of the early Gupta period, have 
survived.’ 

‘The inhabitants of Harappa appear also to have been in the 
habit of offering in their temples terra-cotta cones, with or without 
figures of animals, of which several specimens have been recovered. 
A large cone of dark stone, 11 inches high, resembling the Siva-linga 
of modern times, must have been,’ declares Rai Bahadur Dayaram 
Sahni, ‘ used for worship.”4 

The ancient inhabitants of Harappa are stated to have cremated 
the dead, although there may have been some instances of burial. 
They are stated to have first burned the dead body on a funeral pyre 
and then to deposit a part of the cremated bones in earthen vessels or 
brick-structures resembling the samadhi of modern times. This is 
proved by the discovery of a well-preserved sepulchre constructed 
with the burnt brick of the usual size and lying east to west, with 
probably another structure of the same kind adjoining it on the south 
side, but placed at right angles to it. ‘The former structure consists 
of a horizontal platform of a single course of bricks laid flat and pro- 
tected on three sides by bricks standing upright on the narrow edge. 
The roof was composed of an inclined plane of a single course of 
bricks.’ At the second stratum, also, there was a stout concrete floor, 
composed of nodules of hard overburnt brick, which was littered 
with burnt bones and ashes, indicating that the platform was prob- 
ably used as the cremation floor. In the next stratum, also, another 
funeral structure has been uncovered in which a few cremated bones 
were found. ‘ The existence of two samddhis and the remains of 
cremations at several other spots appear to show that the whole 
of this area was at one time the crematorium of the ancient city. 
This view received some corroboration from the close proximity of 


1 Archaeological Survey of India Report, 1924-25, p. 74. 
40 


CoARSE SANDSTONE LINGA AT HARAPPA 


PLATE XVI 


KUSHAN STUPA 
\BASED ON STUPA 
AT TAXILA 
OF KUNALA 


5 oO 10 20 30 40 50 
SESE eye |S es a en en 


KUSHAN STUPA BASED ON KunAL SttPa, TaxiLa 


PLATE XVIIt 


OUTLINE SECTION, 


— 


Page 41 


r 


INDIA AND ABROAD HARAPPA 


the old bed of the river. In another place, underneath a platform, 
was a mass of cremated human bones, and about 16 feet from it, a 
large heap of ashes and charcoal with human bones ‘ which me 
doubtedly represents the remains of several funeral pyres.’ A double 
rectangular sepulchre has been found at the third stratum. It com- 
prises two distinct compartments, one of which had an irregularly 
shaped relic-chamber, 1 foot 5 inches by 1 foot 4 inches by 1 foot 2 
inches. The contents consisted of a number of cremated bones. 
Human bones were found scattered all over. One large collection 
of animal bones of dogs, sheep, oxen, and horses has been found 
buried. From this collection Rai Bahadur Daya Ram Sahni con- 
cludes that ‘ they might be the remnants of a big animal sacrifice.’8 

A brick-built grave has also been uncovered.* A group of eleven 
burial jars has been found. Some of them contain fragmentary sculls 
and long bones, etc., of babies and adults of various ages.5 

Of the other structures a series of fourteen walls, all running parallel 
to each other and of the same length, 513 feet, appear to represent an 
important construction. ‘ All of them terminated on the west on an 
open corridor, 24 feet wide, beyond which stretched a similar set of 
walls in precise correlation with those in the opposite series. These 
walls exhibit two distinct kinds, namely, a stouter kind and a thinner 
type. All these walls arise from a uniform level at the depth of 12 feet 
below the surface of the mound, and have finished ends towards the 
central aisle. The walls of the thicker type are arranged approxi- 
mately at equal distances from each other, the interval between them 
being 17 to 18 feet in figures, and had it not been for the thin walls 
which intervene between them, it might have been thought that they 
enclosed a series of spacious rooms.’® 

Two little circular structures paved in brick on a thick sub-stratum 
of hard burnt nodules of brick look like ‘ hearths or chimneys of 
some kind.’ 

Another little structure consists of a paved platform, surrounded 
by a single course of brick laid on edge, which might have been a 
bathing platform, as a large earthen jar was standing on one side 
of it. 

1 Archaeological Survey of India Report, 1924-25, P- 75: 2 Ibid, p. 77. 

3 Ibid, p. 79. 4 Ibid, p. 80. 5 Ibid, 1927-28, pp. 86, 87 ; 1928-29, 
Pp. 76-77- 

8 Ibid, 1924-25, p- 76. 

41 


PRE-VEDIC ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


Fragments of solidly built structures have been discovered in Several 
other places. A very big building of considerable dimensions has — 
been found with an open courtyard between the two portions of the 
building with another open court at the back on the west side. < One 
of the two rooms in the western portion measures 14 feet by 12 feet 
internally, while the other, which is separated from it by a passage or 
gallery, is incomplete. The former was provided with an entrance, 
3 feet 10 inches wide on the east side, with a small rectangular drain 
and a masonry bench along one of the walls. Several strata of 
buildings came to light below this level, but they are too fragmen- 
tary. Two cells looking like kitchens or baths have been found. 
They are provided with drains and a gabled roof. Another solidly 
built house has been discovered. One complete room in this structure 
has internal dimensions of 15 feet by 5 feet 10 inches and is provided 
with one door on the south and presumably two on the north 
Sidon 

A circular brick granary has also been found.? 

In a structure composed of bricks three fragmentary terra-cotta 
panels have been found. ‘One of the three panels represents a 
votary kneeling with the palm resting on the projected base of the 
sculpture. (The head of the figure is broken off and the feet are not 
indicated.) Another panel represents only the legs of a standing 
figure, while the third depicts a female figure rising from the ground 
after the fashion of the earth goddess in representations of the 
enlightenment of the Buddha.’? 

‘The inhabitants of Harappa appear also to have been in the habit 
of offering in their temples terra-cotta cones, with or without figures 
of animals, of which several specimen have been recovered.’ Rai 
Bahadur Daya Ram Sahni is inclined to think that ‘a large cone of 
dark stone, 11 inches high resembling the Siva-linga of modern times, 
must have been used for worship.”? 

Concerning the existence of the temples at Harappa, Sir John 
Marshall does not seem to have any doubt. Summarizing the 
account of Sahni, Marshall declares that ‘the temples stand on 
elevated ground and are distinguished by the relative smallness of 

1 Archaeological Survey of India Report, 1924-25, p. 80. 2 Ibid, p. 78. 

3 Ibid, p. 78. In order to discover Buddhistic remains, the Rai Bahadur is 


anxious to identify the fragments of the three earthen jars with very narrow mouths 
with the Buddhist monk’s bottles. 


42 


INDIA AND ABROAD 
jHUKUN 


their chambers and the exceptional thickness of their wall hich 
suggest that they were several storeys in height. To a te ee Is 

doubtless belongs the spacious courtyard with ca els o fin oa 
ments on its four sides.’ But he is doubtful < siete: a i ee 
performed in these temples was iconic or aniconic. The onk “obi : 
found in association with them and intende ence 


F : d apparently for cult- 
worship are of two kinds, viz. “ ring-stones ” and « chessman.” He, 


however, assures that ‘ the fact that no anthropomorphic images have 
yet been“unearthed in these temples must not be reece as a 
proof that the worship of such images was unknown.’ In proof of 
this he mentions that ‘ on a tablet of blue faience, which has just come 
to light, is depicted a figure seated crosslegged (like Buddha on a 
throne) with a kneeling worshipper to right and left and behind the 
worshipper a snake (naga), while at the back is a legend in the 
pictographic script of the period. Now it is possible that this seated 
figure is nothing more than a royal personage, but the presence of the 
kneeling devotees, and particularly of the nagas, certainly suggests 
that the central figure was intended to represent a deity rather than 
a king.’? 

Further excavations? have brought to light numerous fragments 
of dwelling houses, including remains of pilasters and other members. 
There are also three circular structures but their purposes and other 
details are wanting.2 The general account given above, however, 
represents fairly the kinds and conditions of structures at Harappa. 


JHUKUN 


With a view to tracing the Indus civilization, as disclosed by the 
finds made at Harappa and Mohenjo-daro, explorations have been 
conducted in the interior of Sind, which might have been once on or 
near the banks of the Indus, as well as further into Baluchistan. These 
Sind explorations have not yielded any substantial architectural or 
sculptural remains, although the so-called pre-historic pottery and 
implements have come out in abundance. The scanty remains, 
mostly of unidentified walls and of a few buildings, have, however, 


1 Archaeological Survey of India Report, 1924-25; P- 61. 
2 Ibid, 1926-2), pp. 97-103; 1927-28, pp. 85, 86-875 192829) PP. 97» 
103. 
3 Ibid, 1928-29, Plate XXX, (a). 


43 


PRE-VEDIC ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE INV 


been found not only along the old course of the Indus but also 
upon hills and around lakes. 

The remains of buildings discovered at Jhukun, near Larkana (and 
about half way between Harappa and Mohenjo-daro), consist of 
‘over fifty rooms of varying dimensions’ made of sundried bricks. 
‘The floor levels of these rooms show a variation of about 5 to 6 
feet, resting at places on a foundation of debris and at others on a 
solid filling of sundried bricks on pure clay.’ ‘A masonry well 
was exposed on this mound at a level considerably lower than the 
floor of the rooms. This may indicate that the buildings whose 
purposes are unknown were dwelling houses. 

The dates of these buildings are stated to have been indicated 
by the coins and the inscribed sealings discovered therein. ‘ A few 
of the coins are of the class represented by the thick round pieces 
issued by the Kushan King Vasudeva and his successors.’2 This 
would, incidentally, show that those buildings were designed after 
the Hindu style, which is found applied in all Kushan structures. 

Traces of three earlier strata, superimposed one upon another, 
have been uncovered. ‘ The surface layer has vertically a depth of 
about 12 feet. Of the dwellings of this period nothing but a paving of 
burnt bricks and a few traces of sundried brick walls had survived. 
At the middle stratum a number of walls of burnt bricks of Mohenjo- 
daro size were discovered. The bottom stratum also disclosed only 
a few walls of the same type.”? . 

Non-architectural remains, mostly of Buddhistic tablets depicting 
Buddha and Chaityas, have been found in southern Sind, in the 
delta country, at Tatta, Budhjo Takar, Mirpurkhas and other places.* 
Remains of walls and a drain have been uncovered also at Chanhu- 
daro.® Remains of walls of some late period have also been un- 
covered at Lohunjo-daro. But no traces of any complete structure 
have yet been found.® 

The lake Manchhar is usually of 8 to 10 miles in length and breadth. 
It is situated at the foot of the Khirthar hills. Excavations at Masak, 
Lal Chhatto, Lohri, and Lakhiyo on the lake did not reveal any 
architectural objects except faint traces of some walls. But the 


1 Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of India, no. 48, p. 6, Plate II, B, C, D. 
3 Ibid, p. 7. 3 Ibid, p. 9. 4 Ibid, pp. 19, 21. 
5 Ibid, pp. 36, 37, Plate IV, C. 5 Ibid, pp. 48-49, Plate V, C. 


44 


PLATE XIX (a) 


> Buppuist stopA AT Mirpur Kuas (view From SOUTH-EAST) 


PLATE XIX(b) 


pee 


} 
d 
I 


Page 44 


~. 


one 


j 

i 

! 

i 
t 


Fe T, 


= SE 
BURNT BRICK INMUD, ~~4 


SCALE ONE INCH =72 FEET, ° 
PLAN, 


OF MIRPUR KHAS STUPA, 
FROMCOUSENS, 


PLAN oF Mirpur Kuas stupa 


PLATE XIX(c) 


Page 45 


INDIA AND ABROAD JOHI, SEHWAN, AND KOHISTAN 


excavator declares that the « explorations around the Manchhar now 
prove, for the first time, the existence of a lake-dwelling people in Sind 
during the later part of the Indus period. Their settlements were on 
the verge of the lake. Their ways of living could not have been much 
different from those of the present dwellers, many of whom live in 
boats with their families, or in huts constructed on platforms on the 
surface of water. These huts have a curious likeness to the Neo- 
lithic and Chalcolithic pile-dwellings of the lakes of Switzerland and 
other European countries. Whether the ancient lake-dwellers of 
Manchhar used to have similar pile-houses it is difficult to say with 
the data available. The pits and trenches excavated on Lal Chhatto 
and Mashak mounds have not revealed any brick or stone, nor was 
there any indication to show that the lake-dwellings were made of 
these materials,”4 

There are, however, abundant literary evidences in the Epics, 
Puranas, and Silpa-Sastras that special houses were built both on and 
around the tanks and lakes during the early Hindu period. Many of 
the architectural details of these houses are missing. Examples, how- 
ever, exist at Puri, BhuvaneSwara, Pushkar, Madura, and many other 
places. But these are more or less modern structures. 


Jou, SEHWAN, anD KonisTan 


Hill-dwellings have been traced at Johi, Sehwan, and Kohistan. 
At the Johi tract, the mounds, now known as Ali Murad, have un- 
covered the remains of an ancient fortress or fortified palace. There are 
traces of many walls and a rampart. The walls are stated to represent 
the basement of the various chambers and apartments into which 
the buildings were divided.? But these scanty remains would not 
disclose the plan and other details. ' 

The fort at Sehwan (Sindimana of Cunningham), once thought 
to be of the time of Alexander the Great, is now declared to be of 
Muslim origin. But the site itself might yet contain certain ancient 
buildings of early Hindu period upon which the present Muslim 
town has been built. The remains of an ancient fortress have been 
clearly found at Kohtras Buthi. But there are only traces of two long 
stone-walls.* 


* Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of India, p. 65. 
4 Ibid, pp. 89-90, Plate VIII, B,C.  * Ibid, p. 46. 4 Ibid, pp. 132-134. 


45 


PRE-VEDIC ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHI TECTURE IN 


In the Kohistan tract the excavation at Damb Barthi has 
uncovered scanty remains of ancient burial places, which in genera] 
may resemble similar structural remains at Nal in Baluchistan, 
These consist of the outline walls of five chambers wherein human 
bones have been found.1 Pottery and such other remains have also 
been found at Bandhni, Dhal, Maliri Landi, Pokhran Landi and 
Karchat.? 

Summarizing the finds, Mr. Majumdar declares that the sites dis- 
covered fall under two categories, namely, the places where the people 
actually inhabited and those where they carried on the flint-knapping 
industry. The walls of the buildings at the hill sites are stated to 
have been made of stone at the base, up toa height of 2 to 3 
feet, the stone blocks being rough hewn and often laid with mud 
mortar. ‘The superstructure must have been built of mud and 
such perishable materials as reed and wood.’ Though no definite 
information is available, yet it is stated that the roof of these houses 
might have been made of reed and matting overlaid with mud. 
The dwellings in and around lake Manchhar were of different types. 
‘The lake sites have yielded neither stones nor bricks.’ From this 
Mr. Majumdar concludes that ‘here the people lived in pile- 
dwellings, like the lake-dwellers of Europe, in the midst of the lake 
or close to the edge of water.”® 

BALUCHISTAN 


With a view to finding a connexion between the peoples of the 
Indus Valley, whose cultural achievements have been disclosed by 
the discoveries made at Harappa and Mohenjo-daro, and of Baby- 
lonia, excavations have been carried out in Baluchistan, ‘ the country 
lying between these two important river basins and where connect- 
ing links between the two cultures’ was expected to be recovered.‘ 

The excavations at Sampur Mound at Mastung, some 33 miles 
south of Quetta, and at Sohr Damb at Nal in Jhalaw4n in the Kalat 
State some 200 miles southward, do not appear to have yielded much 
to establish that much-wished-for connexion. 

With the same view, further excavations have been carried out 
along the North-West Frontier from the Kuram river down through 


* Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of India, pp. 115-116, Plate IX, C. 
2 Ibid, pp. 120-131. 3 Ibid, pp. 147, 148. 
“H. Hargreaves, Archaeological Survey of India Memoir, no. 35, Preface, iii. 


46 


INDIA AND ABROAD WAZIRISTAN 


Waziristan and the northern district of Baluchistan, with no better 
results.+ 
sul further have been carried the excavations into the far- 
stretched portion of Gedrosia, comprising the territories of Kharan, 
Makran, and Jhalawan, between the Arabian Sea in the south and the 
deserts adjoining Afghanistan in the north, but with the same fate.2 
At Mastung, on the top of the mound, have been found only 
‘ the interior wall of a small room. These walls were of kachcha 
(sundried) brick faced with mud plaster. No other rooms were traced 
elsewhere in this excavation.’? ‘No stone or brick walls were 
found anywhere on this site, and the only kachcha walls recognized 
with certainty were those in the higher sections . . . and the room 
on the summit.”4 
At Nal, also, nothing more than the remains of the stone-walls of 
some structures, possibly rooms and courtyards, have been found. 
‘The word “room” is used for convenience for it is by no means certain 
that they are “rooms” in the ordinary sense of that word. The walls 
are at right angles and roughly oriented to the cardinal points. None 
are of any great height. In all probability the stone-walls were 
merely foundations. Any superstructures must have been of mud, 
brick or some light material which had entirely disappeared. No 
obvious entrances to the rooms can be traced. No traces of any 
roofing material or the charcoal of beams or rafters were discovered 
in this area. Most of the rooms had earth floors, but two rooms 
have pavements of small water-worn boulders and one had a parti- 
cularly solid flooring consisting of three courses of stones carefully 
laid over a foundation of gravel.’® 
Numerous burial places with human remains have been, however, 
‘uncovered in this area, but no architectural details are available.® 


WAZIRISTAN 


The antiquity of Waziristan is established by the mention of the 
river Kramu and Gomati in the Rig-Veda (x, 75), which are identified 
with the present Kurram and Gumal in this region.’ But the 


1 Sir Aurel Stein, Archaeological Survey of India Memoir, no. 37. 
2 Ibid, no. 43. * Hargreaves, Memoir, no. 35, p. 2. 

4 Ibid, p. 3. 5 Ibid, pp. 20-21. 8 bid, pp. 21-28. 

7 Stein, Memoir, no. 37, Pp. 2: 


47 


PRE-VEDIC ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


architectural structures discovered are nothing more than ‘ remains of 
rubble-built walls as well as single courses of large uncut stones at 
varying levels. They are likely to have served as wall foundations or 
floorings.”+ 

In Northern Baluchistan the remains at Zhob, Loralal and Pishin 
are also very scanty from the architectural point of view. ‘ The whole 
of this great mound (at Periano-ghundai in Zhob area) is composed 
of accumulations of clay and rough stones from decayed dwellings 
and permeated by layers containing ashes, bones, and decomposed 
refuse.’? 

In the mound of Rana-ghundai in Loralal District only ‘ the matrices 
left by charred beams, evidently of an old dwelling,’ were traced. 
In places ‘it was possible to make out large blocks of mud _ brick 
masonry.’% 

At Tor-Dherai of the same district have been discovered the so- 
called ‘ written stones,’ that is, Nagari characters and Svastika marks 
on the rocks. ‘ The line of a massive base of stone masonry’ has also 
been traced. A Buddhist relic deposit has also been found at an 
unrecognizable structure which was obviously a Buddhist stipa, but 
no details are available.® 

The antiquity of Pishin also is assured by its mention in Zoroastrian 
scriptures (Vendi-dad, i) among the principal territories of ancient Iran. 
But the architectural remains are practically missing. ‘The central 
mass (at mound Spina-ghundai) shows almost everywhere nearly 
vertical walls of clay mixed with rubble, ashes, and potsherds.’® 

At the Kharan area the only architectural remains consist of ‘ little 
roughly circular enclosures of stones only a few feet across. They 
recalled those funeral ‘ cairns ’ of similar appearance which at Moghal- 
ghundai in the Zhob Valley had proved to mark a burial ground of 
early historical times.’ But here they contained only soft earth with- 
out any deposit of bones, ashes or objects." Similar remains have also 
been traced at the Makran coast.® No early or pre-Muslim remains 
of architecture have been discovered along the central valley of 
Jhalawan and Sarawan.° 


1 Stein, Memoir, no. 37, p. 6. 2 Ibid, p. 33. 3 Tbid, p. 52. 

4 Ibid, p. 65. 5 Ibid, p. 66. 8 Ibid, p. 82. 

Stein, Memoir, no. 43, pp. 34, 77, 86; also his Northern Baluchistan Tour, 
Pp. 46 sqq. 

8 Ibid, p. 77 sqq. ® Ibid, p. 170 sqq. 


48 


INDIA AND ABROAD WAZIRISTAN 


The eS cOVeUies made at Harappa and Mohenjo-daro have made it 
clear that the Indus peoples living in Sindh and the Punjab, and of 
the fourth and lek millenia B. c., were in possession of a highly deve- 
loped culture. At present our researches carry us back no further 
than the fourth millennium B. c., but even at Mohenjo-daro there 
are still earlier cities lying, one below the other . . . and also in 
other sites in Sindh and Baluchistan. One thing that stands clear 
and unmistakable both at Mohenjo-daro and Harappa, is that the 
civilization hitherto revealed at these two places is not an incipient 
civilization, but one already age-old and stereotyped on Indian soil, 
with many millenia of human endeavour behind it, Although 
‘India cannot be regarded as the cradle of human civilization, in 
fact no one country could be so regarded,’ asserts Sir John Marshall, 
yet he would recognize India, along with Persia, Mesopotamia, and 
Egypt, ‘as one of the most important areas where the civilizing 
processes of society were initiated and developed.’! But, so far as 
architecture is concerned, he has no doubt that ‘ there is nothing 
that we know of in pre-historic Egypt or Mesopotamia or anywhere 
else in Western Asia to compare with the well-built baths and com- 
modious houses of the citizens of Mohenjo-daro. In those countries, 
much money and thought were lavished on the building of magni- 
ficent temples for the gods and on the palaces and tombs of kings, 
but the rest of the people seemingly had to content themselves with 
insignificant dwellings of mud. In the Indus Valley the picture is 
reversed, and the finest structures are those erected for the convenience 
of the citizens. Temples, palaces, and tombs there may of course 
have been.’ He recognizes ‘the evidence, in the Great Bath of 
Mohenjo-daro and in its roomy and serviceable houses with their 
ubiquitous wells and bathrooms and elaborate systems of drainage, 
that the ordinary towns-people enjoyed here a degree of comfort and 
luxury unexampled in other parts of the then civilized world.” 

He also recognizes another fact. Among the many revelations that 
Mohenjo-daro and Harappa have made, ‘ none, perhaps, is more re- 
markable than this discovery, that Saivism has a history going back 
to the Chalcolithic age or perhaps even further still, and that it thus 
takes its place as the most ancient living faith in the world.” 

The other cultural achievements of the Indians of the Indus Valley 


1 Sir John Marshall, Preface (viii), Vol. I, Mohenjo~daro and Indus Civilization. 
2 Ibid, Preface v, vi. 


ff) 


PRE-VEDIG ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHI TECTURE IN 


have been correctly inferred from the Harappa and Mohenjo-daro 
finds. ‘Their society is organized in cities; their wealth derived 
mainly from agriculture and trade, which appears to have extended 
far and wide in all directions. They cultivate wheat and barley as 
well as the date-palm. They have domesticated the humped zeby 
buffalo and short-horned bull, besides the sheep, pig, dog, elephant. 
and camel; but the cat and probably the horse are unknown to 
them. For transport they have wheeled vehicles. . . . They are 
skilful metal workers, with a plentiful supply of gold, silver, and 
copper. Lead, too, and tin are in use, but the latter only as an 
alloy in the making of bronze. With spinning and weaving they are 
thoroughly conversant. Their weapons of war and of the charge 
are the bow and arrow, spear, axe, dagger, and mace. The sword 
they have not yet evolved ; nor is there any evidence of defensive 
body armour. Among their other implements, hatchets, sickles, saws, 
chisels, and razors are made of both copper and bronze ; knives and 
celts, sometimes of these metals, sometimes of chert or other hard 
stones. For the crushing of grain they have the muller and saddle- 
quern, but not the circular grindstone. Their domestic vessels are 
commonly of earthenware turned on the wheel and not infrequently 
painted with encaustic designs; more rarely they are of copper, 
bronze, or silver. The ornaments of the rich are made of the precious 
metals or of copper, sometimes overlaid with gold, of faience, ivory, 
cornelian, and other stones; for the poor, they are usually of shell 
or terra-cotta. Figurines and toys, . .. are of terra-cotta, and 
shell and faience are freely used . . . not only for personal orna- 
ments but for inlay work and other purposes. With the invention of 
writing the Indus peoples are also familiar, and employ for this purpose 
a form of script which though peculiar to India, is evidently analogous 
to other contemporary scripts of Western Asia and the Nearer East.’ 

The * analogousness’ of the Indus script to various other scripts 
of Asia, Europe and Africa has been suggested by scholars for the 
past fifteen years. It has not yet been deciphered. Nor is it known in 
which language the then Indians, of Sindh and the Punjab to be 
more particular, used to write and talk. Thus the antiquated theories 
of Biihler and others on the introduction of writing in India from 
the Phoenician source in 800 8. c. can now safely be discarded. 


1 Sir John Marshall, Preface, v-vi, Vol. I, Mohenjo-daro and Indus Civilization. 
5O 


INDIA AND ABROAD WAZIRISTAN 


The cultural achievements of the Indians revealed at Mohenjo- 
daro, Harappa, and other places in Sindh and Baluchistan can now 
be more confidently compared with those disclosed by the Vedas, 
not only with a view to revising the old notions that the Vedic Indians 
did not know the use of writing, but also with a view to understanding 
the casual references to the villages, towns, forts and cities with hundred 
enclosures or fortifications, stone houses, carved stones and brick 
edifices. For if the Indus peoples were the earlier residents, it will be 
curious to imagine that the later and highly cultured Vedic ‘ Aryans 
themselves were still in the village state and that their society was in 
other respects correspondingly primitive.’! Vedic Indians must have 
been aware of the art of building, illustrated in Mohenjo-daro. In 
that case one can hardly persuade oneself to believe that it was 
mere imagination when told that a Vedic sovereign ‘sits down in 
his substantial and elegant hall built with a thousand pillars . . . 
residential palaces being vast, comprehensive and thousand-doored.”2 
Thus one can hardly share the obstinacy of the archaeologist when 
the latter expresses, in the absence of archaeological remains, his 
doubt about the Vedic forts being no more than ‘simple earth- 
works, surrounded by palisades or rough stone-walls.’ 

The inhabitants of Harappa and Mohenjo-daro are surmised by 
Sir John Marshall to have been ‘ the pre-Aryan, probably Dravidian, 
people of India, known in the Vedas as the Dasyus or Asuras, whose 
culture was largly destroyed in the second or third millennium B. c. 
by the invading Aryans from the north.’$ 

In order ‘ to facilitate the co-ordination of the data of archaeology 
with literary evidences,’ Rai Bahadur Ramaprasad Chanda has 
discussed some of the passages in the Vedic literature, comprising the 
Samhitas, Brahmanas and Sitras, ‘the youngest in age among which 
is probably older than the third century 8. c.’* He has endeavoured 
to show that the animosity between the invading Aryans and the 
original inhabitants of India, including those of the Indus Valley and 
farther south and the extreme east, was of such a nature that the 
former destroyed all the towns, cities (fur, pura) and forts (durga) 


1 Indus Civilization, Preface, p. v. * Rig-veda. ii, 313; iv, 179. 
8 Archaeological Survey of India, Report, 1924-25, p. 63. 
4 Archaeological Survey of India Memoir, no. 3 (1926), pp. 12-14 ; no. 41 (1929), 
pp. 1-36. 
51 


PRE-VEDIC ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


of the latter, and that there was thus no possibility of any cultural 


influence between them. : Zs ; 
‘Two of the famous Rig-vedic kings, Divodasa, the chief of the 


Bharatas, and Purukutsa, the chief of the Purus, are found engaged 
in war with the hostile owners of puras (cities). It is said (4, 30, 20) 
that Indra overthrew a hundred. puras for his worshipper, Divodasa. 
The greatest feat that Indra performed on behalf of Purukutsa, the 
chief of Parus, is thus described in a stanza (6, 20, 10) : ‘ May we, 
© Indra, regain new (wealth) through your favour ; the Pirus wor- 
ship thee with this hymn and sacrifice. You destroyed the seven 
autumnal puras with thunder-weapon, slew Dasas and gave wealth to 
Purukutsa. ‘If we can shake off our bias,’ continues Mr. Chanda, 
‘relating to the absence of towns in the Rig-vedic period, we can 
recognize in these stanzas (5, 34, 75 7, 25, 235 1) 415 3) veferences 
to both fort and town.’ It is rightly declared that ‘the recovery of 
the ruins of cities at Harappa and Mohenjo-daro leaves no room for 
doubt that the Rig-vedic Aryas were familiar with towns and cities 
of aliens.’ He concludes that ‘there existed, and the folk-memory 
remembered, that there once existed Arya worshippers of Indra 
who waged wars against civilized aboriginal neighbours living in 
towns and fighting from within strongholds.”* 

The Rai Bahadur has taken pains to quote passages from the later 
Vedic literature also, comprising the Yajur-veda, the Brahmanas, to- 
gether with Aranyakas, the Srauta and Grihya Sutras, and the subsi- 
diary works, as Yaska’s Nirukta, Saunaka’s Brihaddevatd, and Panini’s 
grammar, to show that the Panis, the inhabitants of Anarta, Anga, 
Surashtra, Deccan, Sind, also Gandharas, Sauviras, Kdaraskaras, 
Kalingas, Vangas, Pundras, Keralas, Karkotas, Virakas, Bahikas, 
Madras, Prasthalas, Vasatis, Khasas and others were treated by the 
Aryas as Nichyas (low-born) or Apachyas (ill-mannered ?). He has 
also endeavoured to show that, while the Aryas disposed of their dead 
by burning, these peoples adopted both cremation and burial.” 
But these data would hardly justify the inference that ‘the Arya 
conquerors were inferior in material culture,’? to the ‘ civilized abori- 
ginal neighbours living in towns and fighting from within strong- 
holds.’* Although Indra is called Purohd or Purandara (sacker of 


: annie no. 31, 1926, PP- 2; 3; 4. g Ibid, pp. 6, 7> 8, 9-14. 
8 Ibid, p. 5. 4 Ibid, p. 4. 


INDIA AND ABROAD WAZIRISTAN 


cities), and the Aryan conquerors might have ‘ either destroyed the 
cities or allowed them to fall into ruin, there is, however, nothing 
to show that the former were inferior to the latter in the art of town 
planning and building fortified cities. In fact, the Rai Bahadur himself 
asks his readers to shake off the bias relating to the absence of towns 
in the Rig-vedic period. Thus, if there were towns like Mohenjo-daro, 
and if the Aryans themselves were living in extensive (Satabhujt or 
hundred winged) fur (town) made of copper or iron (Rig-veda, 7, 15, 
4), it will be curious to think that the composers of Vedic hymns, the 
first effort of human beings to express thoughts in such language of 
grammar and metres, if not of some scripts also, were inferior to the 
‘cultured aboriginals’ in matter of house-building. If proper exca- 
vations could be made even the obstinate archaeologist might explore 
better types of cities of the Vedic Aryans, of which the literary des- 
cription has been declared to be poetic exaggeration. In utter con- 
fusion the archaeologist assumes that ‘ the Rig-vedic Aryas reached 
the lower course of the Parushni long after the disappearance of the 
folk that built the ancient city of Harappa and when that city was 
already in ruins.” 


1 Memoir, no. 31, 1926, p. 5. 2 Ibid, p. 2. 


53 


CHAPTER II 
VEDIC ARCHITECTURE 
VEDAS 


Iv Is NEEDLESS to say that the details of the art of building were 
systematically embodied for the first time in the avowedly architec- 
tural treatises. They are necessarily missing in non-architectural 
literature, especially that composed before the growth of the Vastu- 
<astra. But casual references to this art go as far back as the oldest 
existing literature of the world. That the people of that time had 
learnt the art of building, and used to reside in skilfully constructed 
houses and not in natural caves, is sufficiently clear, not only from 
the various synonyms for a-house,! but also from the articles of 
furniture. ‘The hymns of the Atharva-veda? give some information 
about the construction of a house, but the details are extremely 
obscure. . . . According to Zimmer,® four pillars (upamit) were set 
up on a good site, and against them beams were leant at an angle 
as props (pratimit). The upright pillars were connected by cross- 
béams (parimit) resting upon them. The roof was formed of ribs of 
bamboo cane (variga),4 . . . The walls were filled up with grass 
in bundles (falada), and the whole structure was held together by 
ties of various sorts (nahana, prandaha, samdarmsa, parishvanjalya).° It 


1 For griha, dhama or dhaman, pastya, and harmya in the sense of the whole com- 
pound, see— 

Rig-veda, III, 53, 6; IV, 49,6; VIII, 10, 1. 
Atharva-veda, VII, 83, 1 ; X, 6, 4. 
Aitareya-Brahmana, VIII, 21. 

Vedic Index, p. 229. 

2 Ii, 12; IX, 3. Bloomfield, Hymns of the Atharva-veda, 343, et seq. Weber 
pene Studien, 17, 234, et seq. Whitney, Translation of the Atharva-veda, 525 
et seq. 

3 Altindisches Leben, 153. 


_ **Tt seems likely that, as the ribs were of bamboo and were probably fixed 
in the ridge, the roof was wagon-headed, like the huts of the Todas at the present 
day (see illustrations of rivers, The Todas, pp. 25, 27, 28, 51), and the rock-cut 
Chaityas or assembly halls of the Buddhists in Western India, in some of the earliest 
of which the wooden ribs of the arched roof are still preserved.’ See Fergusson, 
History of Indian Architecture, II, 135, cf. 126. 


5 A V.; IX, 3, 4, 5. 
54 


rude Comoe of several rooms . . . and it could be securely shut 
up. 

The above conclusion is no longer tenable, as will be shewn by 
what is quoted below. 

The great variety of Vedic words* denoting a dwelling-house shows 
that the Vedic Indians were long settled with a tradition of house- 
building. Already in the early Vedic period houses were not simply 


- unit family abodes, but were also individual private properties which 


could be acquired. Sometimes a ready-made house could be pur- 
chased for a considerable price (A.-V., TX, 3, 15). A well-to-do person 
possessed several houses. Thus a rich householder is called Pastyavant 
(R.-V., 1, 151, 2; TX, 97, 18). Some poet-singers are described as puru- 
dama (A.-V., VII, 73, 1) and dyatanas are given as examples of prosperity 
(Chhand. Upanishad, VII, 24, 2).8 

‘The view of Zimmer and others after him (Vedic Index, 1, 538 to 
540), that Vedic India knew of nothing more solid and complex than 
the hamlet, like the early Germans and Slavs who had no castle- 
structures and town-life, is an extreme one; for it is now being 
realized more and more as a basic fact that the Vedic Indians, like 
the Iranians, Hellenes, and Italians, were superimposed upon as 
earlier civilization. . . . Thus it becomes quite reasonable to find in 
prithvi, trot, fatabhuji, asmamayi, or Gyasi purs, or the massive, extensive, 
hundred-walled, stone-built, or iron-protected forts, the vivid des- 
criptions of new and wonderful things the Vedic heroes actually 
saw ; and rather forced explanations discovering in them mysteries 
of myths and fancies of metaphor become unnecessary.’* The 
archaeological remains discovered at Harappa, Mohenjo-daro, and 
other places in Sind fully corroborate this view. 

In addition to the noblemen’s mansions (harmya, Sala) and 
king’s palaces (/rdsdéda), comprising several storeys, casually referred 
to in Vedas and Brahmanas, particulars of smaller houses may be 
inferred from the later Vedic literature like the Atharva-veda. Some 
early scholars, to whom the discoveries made in Mohenjo-daro, 
Harappa, and other places of pre-Vedic age were not available, have 
interpreted these details in a figurative sense which is no longer 


1R,-V., VIL, 85, 6. 
2e.g., Stha, Vis, Pratishiha, Gaya, Dama, Dhaman, Sarma. : 
3 Some Aspects of the Earliest Social History of India, by S. G. Sarkar, p. 1. 


* Sarkar, ibid, p. 19. 
55 


VEDIC ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE iN 


tenable. The upamit, pratimit and parimit really imply ‘ timber pillars 
and beams in various positions, vertical, horizontal and slanting.’ 
The varsa, or bamboos, were used mainly for the framework of roofing, 
the central horizontal bamboo supported on the main pillars (sthhina) 
being prominent. The akshu was ‘ the wicker-werk or split bamboo- 
lining over which was laid the thatch (chhadis) of hay, straw or long 
reedy grass (falada and trina), fastened by net to keep the straw- 
bundles intact. The ridge on the top of the roofing (vzshuvant) 
looked like parted hair. Fine clay for flooring and reed-work for 
walls completed the frame work of such a small house,’ which is still 
in practice in most parts of East Bengal. 

In keeping with the requirements of such a house for a family of 
Brahmanic custom in a village settlement, the accommodation pro- 
vided was of modest character. There were ‘several side-rooms with 
a central hall in bungalow pattern (paksha, Kath. Sam., XXX, 5; 
Taitt. Brd., 1, 2, 3, 1).’ The agni-sala (lit. hall of fire-altar), probably 
in the centre, served the purpose of both sacrifice and sitting-room. 
With it was connected the havirdhdna (sacrificial store-room) and patni- 
sadana (women’s apartments or bedrooms). ‘A covered verandah 
ran all round the house. Altogether brihach-chhandas (well propor- 
tioned) house was covered by a many-winged roofing.’ 

‘ This type of dwelling-houses,’ Sarkar correctly concludes, ‘can- 
not have been the only one,’ in the Vedic ages, and ‘ other varieties 
must have developed according to regional conditions.’! 

The particulars of monumental stone structures erected over or 
near burnt or buried bodies are also available in the Vedic literature. 
The Satapatha Brahmana (Chapter XIII) supplies the full details. 
The smaSana (funerary) structures are classified under three groups— 
vastu (reliquary of bones), grihdn (dwelling-house), and prajidnam 
(memorial pillars or stone-slabs). The etymological differences of 
these terms are fully borne out by the actual structures they represent. 
The vasiu type still survives in the name Kapila-Vastu, which might 
have been originally built as the memorial stupa of Kapila ‘ rather 
than the abode of Kapila as usually taken.’ In this sense it would 
look like a solid stone or brick vault with stone enclosures and might 
have supplied the pattern of subterranean and rock-cut caves of 

* Some Aspects of the Earliest Social History of India, by Sarkar (pp. 28 to 32) who 
compares this type with modern Bengal straw-houses with two, four, and eight 
slanting roofs (chalas). 


56 


INDIA AND ABROAD 


VEDAS 


later ages. ‘ The Roman catacombs and Egyptian cave 
instructive parallels.’ 

The grihan means a dwelling-house with many chambers and implies 
that ‘the funeral structure was either an actual house (mausoleum) 
with many rooms, erected over or beside the grave in memory 
of the deceased, and for the benefit of his soul dedicated to some 
religious order or philanthropic use.’! Its extensiveness is indicated 
by its other epithet, harmya, which has been frequently used in the 
early Vedic literature to imply a nobleman’s residence and the 
king’s palace.” 

‘Apart from the minor differences within the approved range at 
regards special forms for the several orders, the structural type tha- 
is regarded as unorthodox is described clearly as round and domes 
shaped (parimandald, Sat. Bra., XIII, 8, 1). That whereby the 
Easterners make the smasdna (funerary structure) separate from 
the earth is described by the usual Vedic word (chami) for a large 
hemispherical bowl, which must here refer to something like a 
vault or dome of solid stone or bricks.1 The structure is then ‘ en- 
closed by an indefinite number of enclosing stones ’* (Sat. Bra., XIII, 
8, 2, 2) ‘as in the case of fire-hearth.’ The orthodox style is stated 
to be square or quadrilateral not separate from earth (bid, XIII, 
8, 1, 1; 8, 1, 2). Bricks one foot square are used in its construction 
(bid, XIII, 8, 4, 11). A memorial mound like a fire-altar is pre- 
scribed for the builders of the same (zbid, XIII, 8, 1, 1). 

‘ The former is the prototype of the Buddistic, Eastern and heretical 
stipa architecture of the very next epoch, and through it of the 
Saiva temple styles of subsequent ages (characterized by the round 
domes). The latter is a specially Brahmanical style, associated with 
sacrificial altars and rectilineal figures, strikingly paralleled by the 


-graves offer 


1 This is not a forced explanation dervied from the later Buddhist monuments 
(vihdra, chaitya). In the Rig-veda (VII, 89, 1), itself the grave is described as 
mrinmaya griha. It is more frequently mentioned in the Atharva-veda— let 
these grihasah be a refuge for him for ever’ (4.-V., XVIII, 3, 51=R.-V., X, 18, 12) ; 
‘make ye griha for him according to his kindred * (A.-V., XVIII, 4, 37), that is, 
the size and excellence depended on the number, position, and means of the kinsmen 
of the deceased (Sarkar, ibid, p. 44) ; ‘as the five clans (manava) implanted a 
harmya (edifice) for Yama, so I implant a harmya that there may be many of 
me’ (4,-V., XVIII, 4, 55)- 

2 See the writer’s Encyclopaedia of Hindu Architecture under Harmya, and compare 
A.-V., XVIII, 4, 55, which refers to © building a harmya for the dead. ; 

3 Stones are used instead of the square bricks in the case of non-fireworshippers 
(Sat. Bra., XIII, 8, 4, 11). 


57 


VEDIC ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


similar sacrificial and geometrical style of squares and bricks in ancient 
Babylonia, and represented recognizably in some later forms of Brah- 
manical temple architecture’ such as at Madura, Tanjore, and also 
in earlier monasteries or several storeys built pyramidically.? 

Another remarkable feature of these funerary structures as des- 
cribed in the Satapatha Brahmana is the regulation—‘ let there be 
chitras on the back of the smasdna.? The commentaries explain 
chitras as natural sceneries. In the case of the brick-built tumuli, these 
chitras would be paintings on suitable plaster, but in the case of 
the stone-built round chama of the Easterners the most suitable chitras 
would be sculptured figures in relief. The nature of these chitras is 
indicated by the reason given: ‘for chitras mean offspring.’ Thus 
the figures painted or carved might have been of women and children, 
and possibly couples of men and women. 

The third variety of the funerary monuments, the prajidnam, 
implies the monumental pillars (or slabs of stones). In the Vedas 
(R.-V., X, 18, 3; A.-V., XVIII, 3, 52) a pillar (sthana) is stated to have 
been set up the grave, and a Joga (clod, pole, also pillar) is erected after 
the earth is piled up from about the grave. On the sthana (pillars) 
‘maintained by the Fathers, Yama makes seats for the departed ’ 
(R.-V., X, 18, 3; A.-V., XVIII, 3, 52). Seats on memorial pillars, like 
lion capitals of Mauryan age, may imply some sort of effigy or bust of 
the dead person. In the time of the Satapatha Brahmana (XXX, 8, 4, 1: 
IV, 2, 5, 15; Kat. Sr. Sut., XXI, 3, 31) ‘a stone-pillar (satku) was 
set up along with three timber ones at the four corners of the 
Smasana (grave or cemetery).’? 

The symbolism of these smaSdna structures might have been 
derived from the civic and sacrificial Vedic drupadas (posts)? to 

* Sarkar further observes (ibid, pp. 40, 39, note g) that ‘ from these indications, 
and from the recognition of round forms in the construction of altars and smasdna 
(funerary structures) in the later samhitds (Taitt. Sam., V, 4, 11), it would_appear 
that the antagonism to round and stone structures displayed by the Satapatha 
Brahmana is a later development in the seventh century .c., very likely due 
to the growing estrangement between the prdachya (eastern) and midland religions 
and philosophical doctrines in the Buddhistic reformation (arrangement of round 
and star-shaped bricks in a circle).’ 

_ ? Sarkar further compares (ibid, p. 43) the account in the epic of the representa~ 

tion of the fertility goddess Jara (or Jata, the traditional village Spirit) on the 
palace walls of the King of Girivraja of a plump woman with children all around, 
and also the panels of female figures, amorous couples, etc., in the later stipa 
and ‘vihdra architecture’ and in Orissan temple sculptures. 

*h-V., 1, 245 13; LY; 32, 23; VII, 86, 5; A.-V., VI. 6 115, 23 XIX ; 
asin SR ao NAN E S OS LO Die el Male tae 


53 


INDIA AND ABROAD eer 


which offenders and sacrificial victims were bound. ‘ The Buddhistic 
monolithic pillars erected beside the relic-stipas and on the high- 
ways and public thoroughfares is probably the developed form 
of such memorial sankus. This is sufficient explanation of the 
Asokan pillars, and a theory of their Persepolitan origin is unneces- 
sary. 

The articles of furniture give more reality to architecture, espe- 
cially regarding the residential buildings. Although conquest and 
religion were the chief characteristics of the Vedic Indians, fortified 
settlements, cities, forts and fortresses on the one hand, and fire-altars 
of various designs? in the absence of regular temples on the other, were 
not the only examples of Vedic architecture. The evidences gathered - 
together above will amply justify the conclusion that civil architec- 
ture was probably the chief building activity of civilized conquerors 
like the Vedic Indians. Thus there are unquestionable references 
to noblemen’s mansions (harmya) and king’s palaces (prasada), which 
are corroburated by the Mohenjo-daro discoveries of earlier ages. 
But the matter of greater importance is the references to unpreten- 
tious dwelling-houses of priestly population in village settlements. 
These smaller houses, of which a pen picture has been drawn 
above and of which the main design is still followed in border lands 
like East Bengal villages, were furnished in a way which affords a real 
insight into the life of the remote past. 

Thus the Rig-veda (VII, 55, 8) refers to ‘married women occupy- 
ing their commodious talpas, the new (and prospective) brides on 
the fashionable vahyas, other single women of the household on 
the broad proshthas, and a maiden on a Sayana, which, as well as 
paryanka, are stated to be the ordinary bedsteads or couches. 
The talpa is the nuptial bed whereupon alone a legitimate son 
(talpya) could be born (Sat. Bré., XII, 1, 6, 2). Its sanctity is further 
sncreased as it was reserved for the preceptor (cf. Guru-talpa, Chhand. 
Upanishad, V, 10, 9). Vahya, that which can be easily carried, is a 
lighter structure used specially in marriage ceremony of getting the 
bride and bridegroom lain on bed side by side (A.-V., XIV, 2, 30), 
which ceremony may also be performed upon a humbler settee 
(dsandi). Upon it a weary bride mounts (A.-V., IV, 20, 3), and 
women generally sleep ’ (2.-V., VII, 55, 8; 4.-V., IV, 5, 3). Thus 


1 Sarkar, ibid, pp. 45, 49: 2 See later p. 63, note 2. 
59 j 


VEDIC ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE In | 


it must be more than a mere litter or canopied sedan-chair. It must 
have been a regular bed spacious enough for two, ‘ bearing all 
forms * and of carved wood-work, furnished with a gold-embroidered 
coverlet (rukma-prastarana). It formed a part of the principal dowry. 
The proshthas look like a ‘combination of a settee and a coffer” 
and were also used as long benches and couches or beds, which were 
also sent as dowry along with the bride to her husband’s home. They 
could also be fixed against the walls and furnished with turned 
legs. The term froshtha-pada as a proper name (arm-chaired or 
stretched-legged gentleman) may indicate it as an easy chair with 
provision for stretching the two legs. The Sayana, or ordinary 
bedsteads, were also meant for ‘a beloved woman or maiden’ (A.-V,, 
III, 25, 1) who ‘felt pain (tuda) of the silken coverlet ’ (because of 
the absence of a male companion). Pururavas and Urvaéi slept on 
such a soft couch (Sat. Bra., XI, 5, 1, 2) and a Vedic student could 
also sleep on it (A.-V., V, 29, 8). 

The dsandi and paryanka ‘ originated with the ruling nobility, 
though in their ritualized and modified form (reed-covered and clay- 
daubed) these must have been subsequently used’ in the ordinary 
priests’ dwelling-houses. In the Vajasaneyi Samhita of the Y, ajur- 
veda (XIX, 86; XX, 1) dsandi is regarded as the ‘mother or womb 
of Rajanyas’ (kings). In the same sense of a high seat it is referred 
to in the Satapatha Brahmana also (V, 4, 4, 1). The Aitareya Brah- 
mana refers (VIII, 5, 6) to its use at consecration and other ceremonies 
where it is ‘ mounted with the right knee first, then the left, approach- 
ing from behind and taking hold of it by both hands.’ This king’s 
asandi was generally carried by two persons, while a god’s dsandi 
called the ‘ throne of justice’ was carried by four persons. While the 
height of the former reached the knee, that of the latter came up to 
the navel. Both were of great width and depth. The imperial dsand; 
for Samrdj was shoulder-high, while the sacrificial one was a span- 
bigh, a cubit in width and depth. All were made of strong wood 
(khadira or udumbara), perforated (vitrinna) and joined with straps, 
pleasant and soft seated, and covered with a tiger’s or antelope’s skin. 
‘The Brahman’s far-shining dsandi in an extensive hall of an 
invincible abode in a city was furnished with two fore-feet, two length- 
wise and two cross-pieces ’ (Kaush. Upan. I, 5; Saknh. Aran. III; 
Jam, Bra., I, 24). 

The paryanka is ‘a magnified dsandi, and like it associated with 
regal style and opulence, rather approaching a bedstead in later 


60 


INDIA AND ABROAD ia 


Vedic times (Kaush. Upan., 1, 5; Faim. Brd., 11, 24, Sankh. Aran., iii) 
put yet used for sitting only; so also, later on, dsandi is taken io 
mean paryankika, or a smaller variety. But it developed to be of 
é‘ unmeasured splendour,’ having same arrangement of feet and frame 
and straps (tantu) stretched lengthwise and crosswise with head- 
piece of the couch (Sirshanya), the supporting back ‘(upasrt) and 
cushion and pillow for the head (uch-chhirshaka).”2 ; 

Various other smaller seats and smaller articles of furniture are 
referred to throughout the Vedic literature. [These will undoubtedly 
indicate a highly developed taste and culture.] 

‘The ritualistic types of furniture cannot, however, be taken as a 
faithful counterpart of the contemporary secular ones, for it is well 
known that sacrificial and ritual requisites almost always remain 
primitive and unchanged throughout long ages, and it is particularly 
true of India ; so that the furniture of the priestly texts is almost that 
with which the Brahmanic cult and civilization started. So great is 
the ritual conservatism in these respects that even where special cir- 
cumstances required alteration in the sacrificial paraphernalia, the 
external items are transformed into Brahmanical-looking accessories, 
by the employment of primitive materials sacred in ritual tradition.’ 
Thus even today the frastara, a sacrificial seat, consists only of 
strewn grass (darbha, R.-V., X, 14, 43 A.-V., 2,65; Taitt. Sam., 1, 7, 7, 
4.3; Vaj. Sam., I, 18 ; XVIII, 63; Ait. Bra., 1, 26 ; II, 3; Sat. Bra., I, 
3, 3, 5). Similarly barhis made of bulbaja grass strewn on the 
sacrificial ground and used as the seat for gods is a sort of litter. 
The karcha is a small square grass-mat (Taitt. Sam., VI, 5, 8, 5; Sat. 
Bra., X1, 5, 3, 4, 73 Ait. Aran., V, 1, 4.3 Brihad. Upan., WY, 11, 1). The 
golden kércha (Sat. Bra., XIII, 4, 3, 1) is interpreted as a ‘ golden 
stool with feet, having a kdrcha-like pad over it,’ or ‘a wooden seat 
carved or painted so as to resemble a karcha.’ The brist (or vrishi) 
is a cushion seat often spread over the grass kircha. The kasipu 
(A.-V., VI, 138, 5) implies a mat (or cushion) made from grass, but 
the chief priest (Ao#i) is stated to sit upon a golden kaSipu, which 
must be of stronger material than grass and of better craftsmanship. 
The sadas, wherefrom the term sadasya (councillor) is formed, must 
have been a ‘raised seat and of a style specially associated with his 
office.” It is elsewhere (Sat. Bra., XIV, 3, 1, 8) used as domestic 


1¥For further details, see Sarkar, ibid., pp. 52-56, and vide Vedix Index of 
Macdonell and Keith. 
61 


VEDIG ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE In 


furniture and implies a seat in a dwelling-house. The fitha is a 
wooden low seat, square or rectangular. The nadvala (Vaj. Sam., 
XXX, 16; Tartt. Bra., III, 4, 12, 1) is also a mat or cushion made 
of reeds (nada). ‘The kata (Taitt. Sam., V, 3, 12, 2) is a rattan mat 
made of split cane (vaitasa). 

That these humbler articles of furniture, like their richer counter- 
parts, were extensively in use is proved by the fact that there were 
professional (women) workers (kari) who ‘evidently turned out 
artistic seats and carpets, as is shewn in the early occurrence of 
hiranya kasipu (A.-V., V, 7, 10) in the sense of ‘a gorgeous woman 
or courtesan with golden mantle’ (drdapz).’ 

In the light of the above the following quotations need no longer 
be interpreted as imaginary or a mere poetic fancy. 

Atri is stated to have been ‘ thrown into a machine room with a 
hundred doors, where he was roasted.’! Vasishtha desired to 
have ‘a _ three-storeyed’ dwelling’ (tri-dhatu-Saranam).2 Mention 
is made of a sovereign ‘ who, exercising no oppression, sits down 
in this substantial and elegant hall built with a thousand pillars,’3 
and of residential houses with such pillars and said to be “ vast, 
comprehensive, and thousand-doored.’* Mitra and Varuna are 
represented as occupying a great palace with a thousand pillars 
and a thousand gates.® Muir’s comment that ‘this is but an 
exaggerated description of a royal residence such as the poet had 
seen, ® is no longer tenable. If the Indians of an earlier age 
could built cities, towns, and villages with splendid buildings like 
those of Mohenjo-daro, there can be no reason to believe that they 
merely exaggerated, even in a poetic description, what they had 
actually seen and probably practised. But it is true that these Vedic 
gods did not occupy such palaces as referred to in the hymns, 
although such palaces might have existed at that time. 


? R.-V., I, 112, 7. Wilson’s R.-V., IV, 148. 2 Ibid, IV, 200. 

3 Thid, II, 313. * Ibid, IV, 179. 

° Compare R.-V., II, 41, 5 ; V, 62,6; VI, 88, 5 ; A.-V., III, 12 ; 1X, 3, which 
contains prayers for the stability of a house at the time of its construction, 

° Muir, Sanskrit Text, V, 455. 

“ Compare R. L. Mitra, Indo-Aryans, I, 27: * Pillars, spacious doors and windows, 
though frequently mentioned, are not decisive indications of the existence of 
masonry buildings , but bricks could not possibly have originated unless required 
for such structures, for it would be absurd to suppose that bricks were known, 
and made, and yet they were never used in the construction of houses,’ 


62 


PLATE XX(a) (i) 


VEDIC FIRE ALTARS. EVERY ALTAR 15 18/2 PURUSHAS IN-ARLA 
EVERY LAYER CONTAINS 200 BRICKS 
ONT BRICK 1S NEVER LAID UPON 
ANOTHER OF SAME SITE & FORM 


\ SSS 


PARIMANDALA DRONA CITI SECOND LAYER. 


VEpiO FIRE ALTARS (PARIMANDALA-DRONA-CHIt) Page 62 


PLATE XX(a) (ii-v) 


pe ESE ES: CORES DET PSE ees 


poe LSE RE fees eee 


OF E> 
SRE SS 
Se OKs 
99% PIN e S| 
i mAOCe, ae 
TARSS 
Ns 
> 


\ 
/ HH 
aa PAHTH 
ALT HY 
(TT VAAVN KEAN 

a titi Lilet ta 


SECOND LAYER. 4% 


UBHAYATA-PRAYUGA-CIT] 


VEDIC FIRE ALTARS. 
FROM BAUDHAYANA SULVA SUTRA. 


SECOND LAYER. 
RATHA-CHAKRA-CITI. 


NOTE. 
Every altar is 15 2 Purtshas in area. 
Every Layer contains 200 bricks. 
One brick is never l2id upon another 
of the same size and form. 


FIRST LAYER. 


V 
VN 


com BEGRGGREN 
Chet Z| LETT 
Eee ANC ry 
oon /ASAEEEEEEENN 
CSE CECE EN 


ACCT 
UCPC BE SERCO EERRBOEENN 


LITT LIVI II II IIIT IFFT 


ay, 
bie 
Th 


SECOND LAYER. 


1 F2 


SECOND LAYER. | 
* PRAYUGA-CITI. SAMUHYA-CIT! 


INDIA AND ABROAD BRAHMANAS AND SUTRAS 


BRAHMANAS AND StTRAS 


The Sulva-sitras, which are but the supplementary portions of the 
Kalpa-sitras, treating of the measurement and construction of the 
different vedis or altars, furnish us with some interesting structural 
details of the agnis, the large altars built of bricks. The construc- 
tion of these altars, which were required for the great Soma sacrifice 
seems to have been based on sound scientific principles and ad 
probably the precursor of the temple which later became the chief 
feature of Hindu architecture. 

These altars could be constructed in different shapes, the earliest 
enumeration of which is found in the Taittiriya-Samhita. Following 
this enumeration,” Baudhayana and Apastamba furnish us with full 
particulars about the shape of all these different chitis (altars) and 
the bricks which were employed for their construction. Everyone 
of these altars was constructed of five layers of bricks, which together 
came up to the height of the knee ; in some cases ten or fifteen layers 
and proportionate increase in the height of the altar, were prescribed. 
Every layer in its turn was to consist of two hundred bricks, so that 
the whole agni (altar) contained a thousand ; the first, third, and fifth 
layers were divided into two hundred parts in exactly the same 
manner ; a different division was adopted for the second and the 
fourth, so that one brick was never laid upon another of the same 
size and form. 


EV Asp 

2 (i) Chaturasra-Syena-chit—so called because it resembles the form of a falcon 
and the bricks out of which it is composed are all square-shaped. 

(ii) Kanka-chit—in the form of a heron (cf. Burnell, Cat. 29, of a carrion kite) 
is the same as Syena-chit except the two additional feet. 

(iii) Alaja-chit—is the same except the additional wings. 

(iv) Prauga-chit—is an equilateral triangle ; and the 
7 (v) Ubhayatah-Praugachit—is made up of two such triangles joined at their 

ases. 
(vi) Ratha-chakra-chit—is in the form of a wheel, (7) a massive wheel without 
spokes, and (zi) a wheel with sixteen spokes. 

(vii) Drona-chit—is like a vessel or tube, square or circular. 

(viii) Parichayya-chit—has a circular outline and is equal to the Rathachakra- 
chit, differing in the arrangement of bricks which are to be placed in six concentric 
circles. 

(ix) Samihya-chit—is circular in shape and made of loose earth and bricks. 
(x) Kiarma-chit—resembles a tortoise and is of a triangular or circular shape. 
Compare Thibaut, 7.4.S.B., 1875, part I. 


63 


VEDIC ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


‘The first altar covered an area of 74 purushas, which means 74 
squares, each side of which was equal to a purusha, i.e. the height 
of a man with uplifted arms. On each subsequent occasion the area 
was increased by one square purusha. Thus, at the second layer 
of the altar one square purusha was added to the 7% constituting the 
first chiti (altar), and at the third layer two square purushas were 
added, and so on. But the shape of the whole and the relative pro- 
portion of each constituent part had to remain unchanged. The 
area of every chiit (altar), whatever its shape might be—falcon, 
wheel, tortoise, etc.—had to be equal to 74 square purushas.’+ 

Frequent mention is made also of villages, towns and forts,2 and 
cities with ‘ hundred enclosures or fortifications’ are referred to.° 
On this Muir remarks that, ‘although they are only alluded to as 
figurative expressions of the means of protection afforded by the 
gods, they no doubt suggest the idea of forts consisting apparently 
of a series of concentric walls, as actually existing in the country at 
that time.’4 

From references like these, and in consideration of the prosperous 
condition of Indian architecture of the pre-Vedic age as disclosed 
by the discoveries made at Mohenjo-daro and other places, it may 
be safely concluded that the authors of the Vedic literature ‘ were 
not ignorant of stone forts, walled cities, stone houses, carved stones, 
and brick edifices.’ 


1'Thus squares had to be found which would be equal to two or more given 
quares, or equal to the difference of two given squares ; oblongs were turned into 
quares and squares into oblongs. Triangles were constructed equal to given squares 
or oblongs and soon. A circle had to be constructed, the area of which might 
equal as closely as possible that of a given square. See illustrations in The Pandit, 
new series, June, 1876, no. 1, Volumes I and IV; 1882, old series, June, 1874, 
no. 97. Volumes IX and X, May, 1876. 
4 4 R.-V., I, 58, 8; 144, 1; IL, 20, 8; IV, 7a 30, 20), Villa 715, TAN Os 

3 95 I. 
3 Ibid., I, 166, 8 ; VII, 15, rile 4 Muir, Sanskrit Text, V. 451. 


PLATE XX(b) (i) , 


u 


SY LNA- CHIT Craicon-sHAPED VEDIC ALTAR) 


NOT JO SCALL 


PAKSHAMADHYA — PAKSHESHTAKAH 


PAKSHAGRIAH 


aia ge 


PADESHTAKAR SHORASHI 


ANSI ES IRS ENIGRYENI ON 
FIRST LAYER 


VEDIC FIRE ALTAR—(SYENA-CHIT)—FIRST LAYER 


PLATE XX(b) (ii) 


—e 
~ 
a 
sr 
<t 
v 
aa 
wi 
> 
a 
fs) 
fort 
a 
ac 
w 
S 
x) 
— 
<< 
uw 
ww 
= 
x 
J 
<i 
CE 
pn] 
Rg 
wv) 


ud 
a 
<< 
ie] 
Pm) 
fe) 
ce) 
= 


AC ZAIDI IS 


ECOND LAYER 


Ss 


ECOND LAYER 


VEDIC FIRE ALTAR—(SYENA-GHIT)—S! 


SY LNA-CHIT AigoRAe ED VEDIC ALTAR 


NOT TO SCALE 


SYENA-CH |]_CFALCON- SHAPED VEDIC ALTAR 


NOT TO SCALE 


FOURTH LAYER 


E XX(h) (0) 


SYENA- CHIT (iALcon-sHAPED VEDIC ALTAR) 


NOT JO SCALE. 


VEDIC FIRE ALTAR—(SYENA-CHIT)—FIFTH LAYER 


. PLATE xxX(b) (ot) 
LIST OF BRICKS USED IN SYENA-CHIT ALTAR 


(1) Indrambi; (2) Prthi; (3) Bhiirashi; (4) Sirasi; (5) Jasteya; (6) Birat ; 


(7) Samrajajyo; (8) Brihashpa ; (g) Agnerya ; (10) Devarama ; (11) Madhugya- 
madha ; (12) MadhuScha ; (13) Ashadha ; (14) Udamyagrushma ; (15) Yastejah ; 
(16) Machhande; (17) Pramachhardah ; (18) Pratima; (19) Aratrivi; (20) 
Birat-chhandasta ; (21) Gayatri-chhandastaja ; (22) Trishtup-chhandasta-chhid ; 
(23) Jagati-chhandanista ; (24) Anushtup; (25) Ushniha; (26) Parnkti-Schar ; 


- (27) Brihati ; (28) Machharn ; (29) Pramachhar ; (30) Pratima; (31) Aratriv ; 


(32) Birata-chharh ; (33) Gayatri-chharh; (34) Trishtupchhamh; (35) Jagati- 
chham ; (36) Anushtup; (37) Ushniha; (38) Parmkti; (39) Brihati; (40) 
Machhanda ; (41) Pramachhandah ; (42) Pratima; (43) Aratri; (44) Birata- 
chhamh; (45) Gayatrichharn; (46) Trishtupachharh; (47) Jagati-chharm ; 
(48) Anushtup; (49) Ushni; (50) Parhkti-chharh ; (51) Brihati ; (52) Aparntve 3 
(53) Aparh-tvodma ; (54) Aparhtvata; (55) Aparhtva ; (56) Aparmtvaya ; (57) 
Arnave; (58) Samudre; (59) Salile; (60) Aparhksa; (61) Aparmsa; (62) 
Apamtva ; (63) Aparntva ; (64) Aparntvayu ; (65) Aparhtvayo ; (66) Gayatri ; 
(67) Aparhtva ; (68) Trishtup ; (69) Jagati; (70) Anushtup; (71) Paktischham ; 
(72) Aravenva ; (73) Ayoshkri ; (74) Ayoshpatva ; (75) Vish ; (76) Brihaspataye ; 
(77) Adhmasarh ; (78) Ritasadasi; (79) Salya-sadasi; (80) Tejahsadasi; (81) 
Vayah-sadasi; (82) Yasah-sadasi; (83) Grino ; (84) Dhamasi ; (85) Sanirasi); 
(86) Ritirasi ; (87) Sakti; (88) Bhiitirasi; (89) Karmasi; (90) Gudoshi ; (91) 
Kshatrarhpa ; (92) Kshatrarhpinva ; (93) Kshatrarhjinva ; (94) Kshatrarhyachha ; 
(95) Kshatrarhdrngaha ; (96) Kshatramasi ; (97) Visveshutva ; (98) Visveshutva ; 
(99) Visveshutvadi; (100) ViSveshutva ; (101) Visvasutva ; (102) Visvasutva ; 
(103) Visveshutva ; (104) Visvasutva ; (105) Visvasutva ; (106) Divisi; (107) 
Svarjirndasi ; (108) Pitanajid ; (109) Bhiirijid; (110) Abhijid ; (111) Visvajid ; 
(112) Sarvajid ; (113) Satrajid ; (114) Dhanajid; (115) Bhabhasi; (116) Vish- 
pabhasi; (117) Prastrabhasi; (118) Sepatnaha ; (119) Abhimati ; (120) Arati; 
(121) Yatuhanarh ; (122) Pisachaha ; (123) Rakshohanam ; (124) Satruhanarh ; 
(125) Udvadasi; (126) Uditirasi; (127) Udatyasi; (128) Atrumama ; (129) 
Atramarntya ; (130) Akantira; (131) Sarhkramamana ; (132) Sarnkramarh ; 
(133) Sarhkranti; (134) Sarmyasi; (135) Svarasi; (136) Ishist; (137) Urjisi ; 


' (138) Bhagesida; (139) Dravinesida ; (140) Sabhritesida ; (141) Prithivyaya 5 


(142) Vishnoprishve ; (143) Idayapah ; (144) Dhritavatisi ; (145) Pinvamave ; 
(146) Samvatsare ; (147) Parivatsare ; (148) Idavatsa ; (149) Iduvatsare ; (150) 
Idvatsare ; (151) Vatsaresi; (152) Ekarhsyam ; (153) Dasasu; (154) Saterhsi ; 
(155) Sahasre ; (156) Ayute; (157) Niyute; (158) Prayutesi ; (159) Arbude ; 
(160) Nyarbude; (161) Samudre; (162) Madhye; (163) Padme; (164) 
Antesi; (165) Parardhasi ; (166) Pinvamanasi; (167) Ritamasyrita ; (168) 
Satyamasi ; (169) Sanirasi ; (170) Sanga-Sritasi ; (171) Sampada ; (172) Ayusah- 
pranangasarn ; (173) Pranadapanangasam ; (174) Apanaduyanangasam ; (175) 


Yyana-chakshuh ; (176) Chakshushahsro ; (177) Srotatmanah S (1 78) Manaso R 
¥(179) Vachaa ; (180) Atmanah ; (181) Prithivya ; (182) Antarvikshaddi ; (183) 


Divahsudhah ; (184) Prithivi; (185) Antariksharh ; (186) Dyaurvasa; (187) 
Rigvaga ; (188) Vidvasa ; (189) Trivrite ; (190) Parhvadagaute ; (191) Maptada 5 
(192) Ekavingagaute ; (193) Trinavantejah ; (194) Manaso ; (195) Tvamasthe ; 
(196) Lokarn ; (197) Lokarhnprina ; (198) Lokarhprina ; (199) Lokarhprina ; (200) 
Lokarhprina. 

(vi) Svena-crurt—Nantes OF BRICES Page 64 


CHAPTER III 

CLASSICAL OR POST-VEDIC ARCHITECTURE 
Buppuist ARCHITECTURE 
‘In THE Buppua’s time and in that portion of Northern India where 
the Buddhist influence was most early felt—that is to say, in the 
districts including and adjoining those now called the United Provinces 
and Bihar,’ the arrangements of villages were practically similar. 
‘We nowhere hear of isolated houses. The houses were all together, 
in a group, separated only by narrow lanes. Immediately adjoining 
was the sacred grove of trees of the primeval forest. . . . Beyond 
this was the wide expanse of cultivated field, usually rice-field.’ 
Villagers are described as ‘uniting of their own accord to build 
mote hills and rest-houses and reservoirs, to mend the roads between 
their own and adjacent villages, and even to lay out parks.” 

The exact details of town-planning are not available. But ‘we 
are told of lofty walls, ramparts with buttresses and watch-towers 
and great gates; the whole surrounded by a moat or even a double 
moat, one of water and one of mud. But we are nowhere told of the 
length of the fortifications or of the extent of the space they enclosed . 
It would seem that we have to think not so much of a large walled 
city as of a fort surrounded by a number of suburbs. . . . From the 
frequent mention of the windows of the great houses opening directly 
on to the streets or squares it would appear that it was not the custom 
to have them surrounded by any private grounds. There were, how- 
ever, no doubt, enclosed spaces behind the fronts of the houses, which 
latter abutted on the streets.” 

1 Buddhist India, Rhys Davids, pp. 42, 45, 49 : compare Fataka, 1, 199. 

Cees Ae 5H fortress, Girivraja, four and a half miles in circumference, is 
said to have been built by Mah4-Govinda, the architect. Bimbisara is stated to have 
built Rajagriha, king’s house, which was three miles in circumference. ‘The 
stone walls of Girivraja are the oldest extant stone buildings in India.’ Mention 
is also made of Ayojjha, Baranasi, Kampilla, Kosambt, Mathura, Mithila, Sagala, 
Saketa, Savatthi, Ujjeni, Vesali_and other cities, of which, however, few architec- 


tural details are given (Vimana-Vatthu, commentary, p. 82). 
Compare Diggha-Nikaya, XIX, 36: 
F arose at 


arfaradt waiter Ea VRHT I 

faeaIty, AMT ASHMT ATTA | 
ae ne y adres wifes Arete 1 
See Rhys Davids, ibid, p- 38. 
65 é 


CLASSICAL ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


But detached references to individual buildings, as distinct from 
villages and towns, are found in abundance in the canonical texts, 
as well as the fatakas. At places it appears as if Buddha were deliver- 
ing discourses on architecture. As a matter of fact he enjoined upon 
his devotees the supervision of building construction as one of the 
duties of the order. It is stated in one of the early texts that the 
Bhikkhus were told on a certain occasion by the Blessed One, after 
the delivery ofa religious discourse, with respect to dwellings, thus : 
‘I allow you, O Bhikkhus, abodes of five kinds—Vthara, Arddhayoga; 
Praésada, Harmya, and Guhda.’? 

Buildings are thus divided into five classes. But the details of the 
distinguishing features are not methodically given in the texts 
obviously because these are not architectural treatises.® 


1 Chullavagga, V1, 17, 1 (Translation, pp. 212-216). . 

2 Vinaya text, Mahavagga, 1, 30, 4, pp- 173-174; Chullavagga, VI, 1, 2, p. 158. 

3 The commentator Buddhaghosha has, however, submitted an explanatory 
note. Vihdra is the well-known Buddhist monastery. Arddhayoga, which literally 
means ‘ half-joining,’ is stated by this commentator to imply Swvarna-vanga-griha or 
‘ gold-coloured bungalow’ as rendered by Oldenburg and Rhys Davids. P.TS. 
Encyclopaedia does not accept this interpretation. Dr. B. C. Law (Indian Culture, April 
1935, P- 717) would interpret it as Garuda (bird)-shaped house, but gives no author- 
ity. There appear, however, no such houses in Bengal, nor is this class of buildings 
mentioned in the Silpa-Sastras. It is clear, however, that these are meant to imply 
some sort of luxurious buildings of the then Bengal. Regarding frdsada, Buddha- 
ghosha simply says that it is a long prdsada. Rhys Davids has made several con- 
jectures— a long-storeyed mansion, or the whole of an upper storey, or the storeyed 
buildings.’ Sir M. M. Williams seems to explain this by ‘the monks’ hall for 
assembly and confession.’ Harmya is stated to be a prasdda with an upper chamber 
placed on the topmost storey. The references to the uses of prasdda and harmya 
as found in the Silpa-sastras, general Sanskrit literature, and the archaeological 
records will be found in the writer’s Encyclopaedia under those terms. Guha literally 
means cave and would seem to refer to underground buildings. One of the Zatakas 
(Ummagga, p. 430) actually contains an elaborate description of an underground 
palace, and there are the rock-cut temples as in the famous Ajanta caves. Accord- 
ing to Buddhaghosha these guha buildings are of four kinds, namely, those built of 
bricks, stone, wood, or earth. Rhys Davids has rendered Sildguha by hut made in 
a rock, and left out the translation of pamsu (Sanskrit parmnsu, meaning sand, dust, 


or crumbling soil) guk@. Buddhaghosha has thus explained the paficha-lendni under 
Mahdvagga 1, 30, 4: 


‘ager ft Gaaaerniey | qarey fr Aqararst | aftaarg ft sof araraae 
qfaigqHermet oraret aa | Ter fer egerer freryer sreqer dguer 


Compare also, Oldenburg and Rhys Davids, Vinaya Texts, Translation, Mahd- 
vagga, p. 173, note, also Chullavagga, p. 1 58, note 2. 


66 


PRIVY. 
CENTRE LINE. # 


VER. 


eet 


RT-YAR:! 


‘Sa 1'S IQNMIVaVH 
NYSSNYS ‘MYS 


5 0 10 


ARDHA-YOGA. 
BUDDHIST BUNGALOW. 


10 0 10 15 2 3 
SCALE OF ee FEET FOR ELEVATION ETC, 


20 30 40 50 60 


SCALE OF LL —_—_—_<__——— 1] FEET FOR|PLAN. 


ARDHA-YOGA—TYPIGAT, ANCIENT RUNCALOW 


NOTE 
The plan is mainly based on the description 


given in Vinaya and other Pali-texts. 


he mea 


——————————————ts 
—— 
ES 


DODDDD ODD 0000 


LONG SECTION, 


PLATE XXI 


Page 66 


PLATE XXII 


ELEVATIONS 

0 25 30 35 40 | 

5 0 5 10 15 20 2530 pea 
| 


SCALE OF 


LAN, : 


BHARHUT STUPI, 


PLAN oF BHARUUT stopa Page 67 


INDIA AND ABROAD BUDDHIST ARCHITECTURE 


Viharas are the well-known monasteries or temples of the Buddhists, 
originally implying halls where the monks met. Arddhayogas seem to 
be a special kind of Bengal building, partly religious and partly resi- 
dential. Prdsadas are wholly residential storeyed buildings ; Harmyas 
are a larger and more pompous type of storeyed buildings. Guhas 
seem to be less dignified buildings, originally built underground for 
middle class people. 

The various objects of Buddhist art, of which archaeological remains 
have been scrutinized by modern architects and historians of Fergus- 
son’s name and authority, are also classified into the five following 
groups, though, of course, it is at times impossible to separate them 
entirely from one another, and sometimes two or more of them must 
be taken together as parts of one monument. 

The stambhas, or lats, are ‘common to all the styles of Indian 
architecture. With the Buddhists they were employed to bear in- 
scriptions on their shafts, with emblems or animals on their capitals. 
With the Jains they were generally dipaddnas, or lamp-bearing 
pillars, but sometimes supporting quadruple figures of a Fina. With 
the Vaishnavas they generally bore statues of Garuda or Hanuman. 
With the Saivas they bore the Trisala symbol, or were dipadanas 
and flag-staffs. But, whatever their destination they were always 
among the most original, and frequently the most elegant, productions 
of Indian art.’? 

The stupas, or topes, again, were ‘ primarily relic-shrines, but may 
be divided into two classes, according to their destination : first, 
stipas proper, or monuments containing relics of Buddha or of some 
Buddhist saint? ; secondly, the stzpas, or towers, erected to commemo- 
rate some event or mark, some sacred spot dear to the followers of the 
Buddha. If it were possible, these two ought to be kept separate, 
but no external signs have yet been discovered by which they can be 


i i : Asoka pillar at Allahabad (Fergusson, 
1 The archaeological remains are scanty : Asok Lp 
Vol. II ae 4, p- 57)- Capital only at Sankisa (ibid, 58). Capital only at Tirhut 
(ibid 58). Capital only at Karle, Bhaja, Bedsa (zbid, 60). : 
2 Th Jains in very early times had stipas and worshipped at'them. Even still 
. ir temples at Satrunjaya, Girnar, Abu, etc., are sur- 


nas in some of the : 2 . 
ee Peele earlier stipas. They were also known as: Chatiyas—as Silvas ape a) 
vivals 0: 


Ti i ; i hurd, Epigra- 
inN t.—Bihler, Legend of the Faina Stipa at Mat. 
st es - ae at pp. 314-321 ; Actes du Vienna Congres Int. Orient, 
ia Indica, Vol. 11, 


Vol. IIT, part ii, plate at p. 142; and infra, part iil, p. 130. 
. >) 


67 


ee acnine HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


distinguished from one another, and till this is so, they must be con- 
sidered, architecturally at least, as one.” 

The rails must be recognized as ‘ one of the most important features 
of Buddhist architecture. Generally they are found surrounding topes, 
but they are also represented as enclosing sacred trees, temples, pillars, 
and other objects. The Buddhist rails, however, in early ages at least, 
is never attached to the toe, and is used for so many other, and such 
various purposes.”? 

The chaitya ® isa more general term than st#pa, and may be applied 
to ‘any building of the nature of a religious monument, but more 
correctly to the second division of séazpas, or those commemorative of 
acts, miracles, etc., or not funerary.* But it has further been restricted 
so as to correspond with the churches of the Christian religion ; their 
plans, the position of the altar or relic casket, the aisles, and other 
peculiarities are the same in both, and their uses are identical in so 

far as the ritual forms of the one religion correspond to those of the 
other.”6 

The vihara with the Buddhists and Jains was a hall where the monks 
met and walked about; afterwards these halls came to be used as 
temples, and sometimes became the centres of monastic establish- 
ments. Like the chaityas, they resemble very closely the corresponding 
institutions among Christians. In the earlier ages they accompanied, 


1 Pagaba is a Singales> word applied to a stipa, from the Sanskrit dhatu, 
‘relic,’ ‘element,’ and garbha (in Pali gabbho), a ‘womb,’ ‘ receptacle ’ or 
‘shrine.’ Dhatugarbha is thus the relic-receptacle or inner shrine, and is strictly 
applicable only to the dome of the stupa, sometimes called the anda or egg. 
Dhdatus were not merely relics in the literal sense, but memorials in an extended 
acceptation, and were classified as corporeal remains ; objects belonging to the 
teacher, as his staff, bowl, robe, holy spots, etc.;and any memorial, text of a sacred 
book, cenotaph ofa teacher, etc. Stipas are known as chaityas in Nepal, and as 
dagabas in Ceylon. 

The principal examples are at Bhilsa, Sarnath, Bodhagaya, 
dhara, Jalalabad and Manikyala. 


2 The principal examples are at Bharaut, Mathura, Sanchi, and Amaravati. 
3 The word chaitya, like stupa, means primarily a heap or tumulus, but it 
also means a place of sacrifice or religious worship, an altar—from Sanskrit chita, 


a heap, an assemblage, etc. Properly speaking, therefore, chaitya cay 
perhaps to be called ‘halls containing a chai ; h 1 pies 


; tya,’ or ‘ chaitya halls,? and this 
latter term is consequently used wherever any ambiguity is likely to arise from the 
use of the simple term chaitya. 

4 All structures of the nature of sanctuaries are chaityas, 
statues, religious inscriptions and sacred places come also unde 


5 Principal examples are at Sanchi, Ter Chezarla, Bhaja, 
etc. 


Amaravati, Gan- 


so that sacred trees 
r this general name, 
Karle, Ajanta, Elura, 


68 


PLATE XXIII 


Page 68 


VIJARA HALL, PLAN OF CAVE 16, AJANTA 


SCALE 25 FT=1 INCH. 
CAVE NO. 16 AJANTA 


INDIA AND ABROAD BUDDHIST ARCHITECTURE 


but were detached from, the chaityas or churches. In later times they 
were furnished with chapels in which the service could be performed 
independently of the chaitya halls which may or may not be found in 
their proximity.’ 

The extensiveness of these buildings can be imagined not only from 
the colossal structures at Burobodur, Angkorvat, and other places, but 
also from the length of time devoted to getting a house completely 
built. Thus, it is stated that, ‘ with reference to the work of a small 
vihdra, it may be given in charge (to an overseer) as a navakamma 
(new work) for a period of five or six years, that on an addhayoga 
for a period of seven or eight years, that on a large vihara or a pasada 
for ten or twelve years.’? That the long periods were not idled away 
will be clear from the following details of houses gathered from the 
Vinaya texts.3 

‘Even in the Buddha’s time the size of these monuments had 
already reached very considerable dimensions. The solid dome erected 
by the Sakiyas over their share of the ashes from the Buddha’s funeral 
pyre must have been about the same height as the dome of the 
St. Paul’s measured from the roof.’4 

The selection of building sites shows a highly developed good taste. 
The drama (rest-house), well fitted for quiet people, is stated to be 
built ‘not too far from the town and not too near, convenient for 
going and for coming, easily accessible for all who wish to visit him, 
by day not too crowded, by night not exposed to too much noise and 
alarm. . . .° The whole compound is enclosed with ramparts 
(prakara) of three kinds, namely, brick walls, stone walls, and 
wooden fences, which are again surrounded with bamboo fences, 
thorn fences, and ditches.® 

‘ pane . I, pp. 54-55. 

See ie emples are af Mamalacuee Soe 

Elura, Bagh, Dhamnon, Kuda, etc. 


2 Chullavagga, V1, 17, 1 (Translation, p. 214). 

8 [bid, VI, 5, etc., and Mahdavagga. : ' 

4 Rhys Davids, page 83-84. References to a large number of topes will be found in 

Die Encyclopaedia under Stipa. Buddhaghosha’s enumeration of the parts of 

the writer s be s the popularity of the subject of architecture in Buddhist litera- 
a palace alie's pees nama yatha pasadam patva thambho nama, sesadabhasam- 
ture. niles feereceae tula sarhghata bhitti padakutagopanasipakkhapasa- 
bharanam ei ethe baddha thambhe patitthita evam eva sahajatasampayutta- 
ee eet hoti.’ cee 286, p. 107, ed. Miller). 

am ; 

- VI, 4, 8 (Translation, p. 187). 

aie, ” oy (translation! pp- 176-177, 187). 


69 


CLASSICAL ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


Houses were built comprising ‘ dwelling-rooms and retiring- 
rooms, and store-rooms, and service halls, and halls with fire-places 
in them, and store-houses, and closets, and cloisters, and halls for 
exercise, and wells, and sheds for the wells, and bathrooms, and halls 
attached to the -bathrooms, and ponds, and open-roofed sheds 
(mandapas).’t These buildings are meant to be dwelling-houses ; 
so it is stated that ‘an upasaka (devotec) has built for his own use a 
residence, a sleeping room, a stable, a tower, a one-peaked building, 
a shop, a boutique, a storeyed house, an attic, a cave, a cell, a store- 
room, a refectory, a fire-room, a kitchen, a privy, a place to walk 
in, a house to walk in, a well, a well-house, a yantra-griha (which is 
supposed by Biihler to be “a bathing place for hot sitting baths’), 
a yantra-griha room, a lotus pond and a pavilion.’ 

The inner chambers are divided into three classes, called s2vzka- 
garbha or square halls, nalka-garbha or rectangular halls, and harmya- 
garbha which appears to a be large dining-hall.8 The verandahs (alinda) 
seem to have been a special characteristic of these buildings. The 
Blessed One (Buddha) says, ‘I allow you, O Bhikkhus, covered 
terraces, inner verandahs, and over-hanging eaves.’* The storeyed 
buildings (prdsada) are stated to be furnished with ‘ a verandah to it, 
supported on pillars’ with capitals of elephant-head.° 


1 Chullavagga, VI, 4, 10 (Translation, p. 189). 

2 Mahdvagga, III, 5, 9 (Translation, p. 304), also III, 5,6 (Translation, p. 303). 

3 About the last Buddhaghosha seems to be doubtful and says : 

aferart fr FEMTTSTETT HASTA AT AT ; 

But about the other two terms he is clear : 
fafaarrett fr ager; arfearrait fa facaredt farnfeyrarat § <terreqat 
(Chullavagga, V1, 3, 3). But Oldenberg and Rhys Davids seem to have been wholly 
misled when they translated these last two by ‘ palankeen shaped and quart measure 
shaped,’ about the latter of which Indians of even today are quite unfamiliar. 

4 Chullavagga, VI, 3, 5 (Translation, p. 175), commented on by Buddhaghosha : 
aferat aa wat azate | 

Compare Abhiddnappadika, verse 218 : 


qai am a franen a ofaaar a ele aaa, cea faere ait sudl ged Prefeear. 


aren Ut afsaaay qarad fa fi qeafr cHeenfaasse TaNcT aA Thay 
qzata wHeq fer grat! sacar fr sarforat oat scar Tal est alarteat ad STeTTTa | 


5 Tbid, VI, 14, 1 (Translation, p. 208): gfeamaa supported on the frontal 
globes (kumbha) of elephants, says Buddhaghosha, 


70 


PLATE XXIV 


BUDDHIST STUPA — 
RAILS 


ve 
‘3 


x APH Ae 
, 
SZ Y 


SECTION 


BAA 


STUPA RAILS~SIMPLE 


Ppan or BUDDHIST RAILS Page 70 


PLATE XXV 


PRASADA OR ROYAL PALACE 
FROM PALI TEXTS 


GRANARY 


COURT YARD 
COURT YARD 


oa 
4 
< 2 
= = 
; 3 
L~ 4 
5 uv 
fe) 
Vv 


| ofne 
| runic 


INDIA AND ABROAD BUDDHIST ARCHITECTURE 


Details of gates, doors, and windows are also elaborate. Gateways 
are built with rooms and ornamental screen-work over them.! And 
gates are made of stakes interlaced with thorny brakes.” 

Doors are furnished with ‘ door-posts and lintel, with hollows like 
a mortar for the door to revolve in, with projections to revolve in those 
hollows, with rings on the door for the bolt to work along in, with a 
block of wood fixed into the edge of the door-post, and containing a 
cavity for the bolt to go into (called the monkey’s head), with a pin 
to secure the bolt by, with a connecting bolt, with a key-hole, with 
a hole for a string with which the door may be closed, and with a 
string for that purpose.’* The windows are stated to be of three kinds 
according as they are made with railings, lattices, and slips of wood.* 
The shutters are adjustable and can be closed or opened whenever 
required.® Five kinds of roofing are mentioned—brick-roofing, stone- 
roofing, cement-roofing, straw-roofing, and roofing of leaves. The 
roof is first covered over with skins and plastered within and with- 
out ; then follow whitewash, blocking, red-colouring, wreath-work and 


1 Chullavagga, V1, 4, 10 (Traslation, p. 189) ; 3, 10, dtm of which excellent 
examples in stone have been found at the Safichi and Bharhut Topes (Translation, 
p- 178). 

2 Ibid, VI, 3, 10 (Translation, p. 178). 

3 Thid, VI, 3; 8, also 2, 1 and 17,1 (Translation, p. 177; 161, 213). Compare 
the distinction between sare (door proper) and gI< (doorway or gateway) 
(Translation, p- 160, note 3). The keys are stated to be of three kinds, as they 
are made of bronze, hard wood, or horn (VI, 2, 1 ; Translation, p. 162). 

4 [bid, VI, 2 2; Sfzat ataqrd which according to Buddhaghosha means 
afea afearafed, of which Afzat has been explained by Rhys Davids in his note 
on Maha Sudassana Sutta, 1, 6o (see R. D.’s Buddhist Suttas, p- 262). aTeatatar 


aa Senate of which re literally means ‘net? but corresponds to lattice. 
’ 


R. D. advises to compare Anglo-Indian ‘jalousic’ (p. 162). aww area ara 
areata which ‘ possibly means with slips of wood arranged horizontally as 
He ie Venetian blinds’ (p. 163). In spite of all these, the learned Orientalists 
Rhys Davids and Oldenberg, would say that ‘ There were, of course, =o Se 
in our modern sense, but only spaces left in the wall to admit light and air, ani 


covered by lattices of three kinds ” (note on ibid, VIII, 2, 2; Translation, p. 279). 

5 Mahavagga, 1; 25> 18 (Translation, p. 160) ; Chullavagga, VIII, 2, 2 (Transla- 
tion, p. 279): ' 

6 Chullavagga, V1, 3, 1° (Translation, p- 
etc. 


179). Compare also VI, 3, 8, 3> 3; 


71 


CLASSICAL ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


creeper-work.1 ‘The floors were of earth, not of wood, and were 
restored from time to time by fresh clay or dry cowdung being laid 
down, and then covered with a whitewash in which sometimes black 
or red was mixed. From the parallel passage in Mahdvagga (1, 25, 15) 
and Chullavagga (VIII, 3, 1), it would seem that the red colouring 
was used rather for walls, and the black one for floors.’”? It appears, 
however, that with a view to removing the dampness, gravel was 
spread over the  floor.® 

There were stairs of three kinds, namely, brick-stairs, stone-stairs, 
and wooden-stairs. And they were furnished with dlambana-bahu or 
balustrades.* A more detailed description of flights of stairs (sopdna) 
is given in the Mahda-Sudasana Sutta : ‘ach of these had a thambha, 
evidently posts or banisters ; sichiyo, apparently cross-bars let into 
these banisters; and unhisam, either a headline running along the 
top of the banisters, or a figure-head at the lower end of such a head- 
line.”5 mie 

Thus it is clear that very minute details also are mentioned in this 
literature. The subject, therefore, seems to have been treated in a 
more than casual manner. 

“The entrance to the great ‘houses was through a large gateway. 
To the right and left of the passage-way were the treasury and grain 
stores. ‘The gateway led into an inner courtyard round which were 
chambers on the ground floor. And above these chambers was a 
flat roof called the upari-prasdda tala, the upper flat surface of the 
house, where the owner sat, usually under a pavilion, which answered 
the purpose at once of a drawing-room, an office, and a dining hall.’ 

“In the King’s palace there was accommodation also for all the 
business of the State, and for the numerous retinue and the extensive 
harem. . . . The supplementary buildings included three institu- 
tions which are strange to us and of considerable historical interest.’ 

1 Chul i ; : 
ee ee eee, Fe ces of the tom 


? ] by ‘skins’ seems doubtful 
and unsuitable. Buddhaghosa in his note at the latter lade says Rae fafa 
zearfeg Fscat arate | . 


* Rhys Davids and Oldenberg, 
p. 218). 

® Compare Chullavagga, V, 14, 5. 

* Chullavagga, V, 11, 6 (Translation, p. 96). 


5 Maha-Sudasana Sutta, 1, 59. See also R. David : es 
compare Chullavagga, VI, 3, 3. avids, Buddhist Suttas, p. 262, and 


note on Chullavagga, VI, 20, 2 (Translation, 


72 


Sie 


SCALE OF 


PLATE XXVI 


|_ MA MASWGS_|__ MEL), _| 


BUDDHIST BATH-TURKISH MODEL. 


1 5 te) 15 20 25 30 36 40 , 
eet ta : SECTION 


BuppHIST BATH, GENERALLY KNOWN AS TURKISH BATH 


Page 72 


PALLAVA ARCHITECTURE, KAILASANATH TEMPLE AT ELLORA 


PLATE XXVII 


! mY 
1) ma. 


xu 


223, 


& 
3 


~ 


INDIA AND ABROAD BUDDHIST ARCHITECTURE 


* We are told several times of a building of seven storeys in height.’ 
Professor Rhys Davids seems to be of the opinion that these buildings 
must have some connexion with the Seven-storeyed ziggarats of 
Chaldzea. ‘ But in India the use to which such Seven-storeyed palaces 
were put was entirely private, and had nothing to do with any 
worship of the stars.’ Still he would add that ‘in this case also the 
Indians were borrowers of an idea.’ 

* Another sort of building historically interesting were the hot- 
air baths, described in full in Vinaya texts.2 They were built on an 
elevated basement faced with brick or stone, with stone-stairs leading 
up to it, and a railing round the verandah. The roof and walls were 
of wood, covered first with skins, and then with plaster ; the lower 
part only of the wall being faced with bricks. There was an ante- 
chamber, and a hot-room, and a pool to bathe in. Seats were arranged 
round a fire-place in the middle of the hot-room; and to induce 
perspiration hot water was poured over the bathers. . . .’ 

In the Digha Nikaya® there is a description of ‘ another sort of bath, 
an open-air bathing tank, with flights of steps leading to it, faced 
entirely with stone, and ornamented both with flowers and carvings.’ 

‘ The first step was probably merely to build the cairn more care- 
fully than usual with stones and to cover the outside with fine chunam 
plaster to give a marble-like surface. The next step was to build the 
cairn of concentric layers of the huge bricks in use at the time, and to 
surround the whole with a wooden railing.’ 

The articles of furniture, which form an important part of the 
architectural subjects, are also elaborately described in the Buddhist 
literature. Benches were made long enough to accommodate three 
persons.* The bedstead (pallanka), or divan, was, a separate piece or 

Pier tan atl : : . R. Davids refers 

to Bicester HiN pected epee Gee one thousand-stone 
lars on which another was erected at Anuradhapura.” (Buddhist India, p. 70). 
ee III, 105-110, 297. ‘After the bath there was shampooing, and then a plunge 
into ihe pool.’ ‘It is very curious to find,’ observes Rhys Davids, ‘ at this very early 


i alley a sort of bathing so closely resembling our modern ” 

Sabet Wane Te ‘Did the Turks,’ he asks, ‘ derive this custom from 
ia ?’ ] « 74. 

toil ee aaa by R. Davids (p. 262 foll.), who refers to ‘several 

ient baths still to be seen at Anuradhapura ,in a fair state of preservation in spite 

of th more than two thousand years,that have elapsed since they were first con- 

Geter > (Ibid, p. 76.) These baths may well be compared with those discovered 


henjo-daro. ; 
a halla, VI, 13, 2 (Translation, p- 208). 


73 


CLASSICAL ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


furniture.1 Large couches (dsandz), or chairs, seem to" have been im- 
portant articles of furniture.? Couches covered with canopies are also 
mentioned.? Mention is made of a large variety of chairs, namely, 
rectangular chair (dsandako), arm-chair, sofa (Satiango), sofa with arms 
to it, state chair (bhadda-pitham), cushioned chair (pithtka), chair raised 
on a pedestal (ctaka-padaka-pitham), chair with many legs (dmalaka- 
vantika-pitham), leaning board (phalakam), cane-bottomed chair (koch- 
chham) and straw-bottomed chair. Mention is also made of the litter 
or sedan-chair.5 

Valuable carpets, rugs, pillows, curtains, and such other luxurious 
decorations also are elaborately described. Thus mention is made 
of ‘ coverlets with long fleece, counterpanes of many colours, woollen 
coverlets white or marked with thick flowers, mattresses, cotton 
coverlets dyed with figures of animals, rugs with long hair on one or 
both sides, carpets inwrought with gold or with silk, large woollen 
carpets such as the nautch (dancing) girls dance upon, rich elephant 
housings, horse rugs or carriage rugs, panther or antelope skins, 
large cushions and crimson cushions.’® Pillows are of various kinds ; 
they are stated to be of both ‘ the size of a man’s head’ and half 
“the size of a man’s body.’ The Buddha allows the Bhikkhus ‘ to 
comb out the cotton, and make the cotton up into pillows if it be of 
any of these three kinds, cotton produced on trees, cotton produced 
on creepers, and cotton produced from fotaki grass.’ The bolsters 
made for the use of high officials were of five kinds, as they were stuffed 
with wool, cotton cloth, bark, grass, or leaves. There were also coverlets 


1 Chullavagga, VI, 14, 1; VI, 8,1, etc. (Translation, pp. 209, 197) ; Maha- 
vagga, V, 10, 3 (Translation, p. 27). 

* Ibid, VI, 14, 1; VI, 8, 1, etc. (Translation, pp. 209, 197) ; Mahavagga, V 
10, 3 (Translation, p. 27). Rhys Davids and Oldenberg under asandi, twice by 
cushions and once by couches, and Childers by ‘chairs’ (see his Dictionary), : 
It seems to imply Sanskrit @sana, which means “a seat.’ 

7 Mahdvagga, V, 10, 3 (Translation, p. 27). 

Chullavagga, VI, 2, 4 (Translation p- 165). Renderings are mostly thosc 
made by Rhys Davids and Oldenberg depending on Budaheet nae anit Gon. 
pare also Chullavagga, VI, 20, 2 and VUI, 1, 3. Apassena-phalakam as a ‘ board to 
ae up gent is pe enioned in Mahdvagga, 1, 25, 15, 16. For arm-chair 
and sola there seems to be another expressio: H 
Mone Tee. Pp. n, apasayam, see Buddhaghosha’s note 

» Mahdvagga, V, 10, 2 (Translation, p. 27). 

° Ibid, V, 10, 3 (Translation, p. 27). 

7 Chullavagga, VI, 2, 6 (Translation, p. 167) ; see also IV, 4, 4, and VIII, 
1, 3s 


74 


INDIA AND ABROAD JAIN ARCHITECTURE 


for them.’ The smaller articles like the floor cloth, mosquito curtain 
handkerchief and spittoon did not escape the notice of the then Hise 
decorators.”* 

¢ It is almost impossible to over-rate the importance of architecture 
and its associated arts in elucidating and giving precision to our 
knowledge of Buddhist history and mythology, from the time when 
it became the religion of the State till it perished in so far as India 
was concerned.’ 

‘In the rails at Bodhgaya and Bharaut, we have a complete picture 
of Buddhism as it existed during the great Maurya dynasty (320 
to 180 B.c.). At Sanchi and western caves we have as complete a 
representation of the form it took from the second century before our 
(Christian) era to the third after it. At Amaravati, and from the 
Gandhara monasteries, we learn what modifications had been intro- 
duced between our era and the third century; and from the Ajanta 
and later caves we trace its history downwards through its period of 
decay till it faded away altogether.’ 

‘ During the first of this thousand years we have no contemporary 
records except those written in stone, and during the latter we have 
no books we can depend upon ; but the architecture, with its sculptures 
and paintings, remain, and bear an indelible impress of the thoughts, 
the feelings, and the aspirations of those who executed them, and 
supply us with a vast amount of exact knowledge on the subject which 
is not attainable by any other means now known to us.’? 


Jain ARCHITECTURE 

The Jainas are known as the Digambaras and Svetambaras. The 
former regard, at least theoretically, nudity ‘as a sign of holiness, 
though they are now obliged to part from the outdoor practice of 
their theory.’ The latter are supposed to be ‘clad in white.’ “The 
Jaina religious theories and practices, in many respects, closely 
resemble those of the Buddhists.’* They have ‘ no veneration for relics 
like the Buddhists. The proper objects of their worship are the 

Z i . 168). 

arbi we eee "3 gta ae : V, 14, 1 (Translation, p. 102) ; 
Mahdavagga, VIII, 18 (Translation, p. 227) ; for cholaka, or handkerchief, see also 


Chull VI, 19 and V, 9, 4. 

3 Bergin adit and Basi Architecture, Vol. I (1910), pp. 2497250. | 

4 The Jainas acknowledge no supreme governor, believe in transmigration, regard 
all animal life as sacred, and revere the Jinas or Tirthankaras. They consist of ecclesi- 
astics—Yalis or Sadhus—and lay believers or Sravakas. 


75 


CLASSICAL ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


twenty-four Jinas or Tirthankaras, but, like the Buddhists, they allow 
the existence of Hindu gods, and have admitted into their scuiptures 
at least such of them as are connected with the tales of their saints, 
among which are Indra or Sakra, Garuda, Sarasvatt, Lakshmi, Asuras, 
Nagas, Rakshasas, Gandharvas, Apsaras, etc., forming a pantheon of 
their own, divided into four classes, namely, Bhavanadhipatis, Vyan- 
taras, Jyotishkas, and Vaimanikas. In architecture both Buddhist 
and Jain structures are more closely connected with the Hindu 
ones. The Jain style was ‘essentially Hindu,’ declares Fergusson, 
‘and was doubtless largely common to all Hindu sects in Western 
India, but in its evolution it became modified by Jain taste and 
requirements. In fact the requirements alone have differentiated 
also the Buddhist architecture from the Hindu one. ‘ And, the 
Brahmanas in turn, through the influence of the workmen, gradually 
accepted most of the stylistic improvements of their rivals. This 
seems to have been more especially the case in Gujrat and Rajputana, 
where the Jainas were very numerous and influential, and we might 
almost with equal propriety designate their style of architecture as a 
western Hindu style.”? 

‘The religion of the Buddhists and that of the Jains were so 
similar to one another, both in their origin and their development of 
doctrines, that their architecture must also at first have been nearly 
the same. A strong presumption that the architecture of the two sects 
was similar arises from the fact of their principal sculptures being 
so nearly identical that it is not always easy for the casual observer 
to distinguish what belongs to the one and what to the other; 
and it requires some experience to do this readily. The Tirthankaras 
are generally represented as seated in the same cross-legged attitude 
as Buddha, with the same curly hair, and the same solid contem- 
plative expression of countenance. The Svetambara Jains are also 
clothed much like the Buddhists.’? Thus, like those of the Buddhists, 
there are Jaina caves at Orissa, at Badami and Aihole, at Dhara- 
sinva, Ankai and Elura. There are again the Jain monolithic pillars 
at Elura and other places much like the Asoka pillars of the Buddhist 
style. But the Jain structural temples at Lakkundi, Palitana, Girnar, 
Mount Abu, Pareshnath, Ranpur, Gwalior, Khajuraho, Chitor and 
other places have more resemblance with the Hindu temples. In fact 
‘a2 Fergusson, Indian and Eastern Architecture, NB ase 

2 Ibid, pp. 6-7. 


76 


INDIA AND ABROAD BRAHMANICAL ARCHITECTURE 


hardly any distinction is noticed bet 
modern Jain temples at Sano 
places. 

There is, however, a marked difference of the Jain architecture of 
the north and of the south. ‘ The first peculiarity that strikes one: 
as distinguishing the Jain architecture of the south from. that of the 
north, is the division of the southern temples into two classes, Bastis 
(Basadi, Vasati, monastery or temple) and Bettas (? Vasahika, 
buildings, including monastery and temple). The former are teinples 
in the usual acceptance of the word; as understood in the north, and, 
as there, always containing an image of one of the. twenty-four 
Tirthankaras, which is the object there worshipped: : The latter ‘are 
unknown in the north ; and are courtyards usually on a hill or rising 
ground, open to the sky and containing images, not of a Tirthankara, 
but of Gomata or GomateSwara so called, though he is not known to 
the Jains in the north.’ While the Jain Bastis at Sravana Belgola.” 
would look like an ordinary Hindu temple, the lamp-bearing, pillar 
before it, as also at Guruvayankeri, resembles the Buddhist free pillars. 
But the Jain temples at Undabidri.and its pillars have.similarities with 
the Buddhist pagodas and pillars of. the far eastern colonies of the 
Hindus. 


ween the Hindu temples and 
garh, Ahmedabad, Delhi and other 


BRAHMANICAL ARCHITECTURE : 


The Buddhist and the Jain architecture, together with all other early ” 
Indian architecture, may be included’under a general term which, 
for the want of a better designation, may be called Hindu architecture. ° 
Thus for the sake of clarity alone a new division, . namely, the . 
Brahmanical architecture, has become necessary, because, otherwise’ 
the Buddhist and the Jain groups will be confusing, if not meaningless. 
Under the Brahmanical group will be understood what:aré cammonly 

known as Northern or Indo-Aryan architecture, and the Southern 
or Dravidian, Chalukyan and Pallava architecture. The former is 
illustrated by the extant Brahmanical rock-cut temples at Elura, 
Badami, Elephanta, and other places, and structural temples at 
Pattadakal, Bhuvane$vara, Kanarak, Puri, Cuttock, Jaspur, Benares, 
Vrindavan, Khajuraho, Udaipur, Amritsar, Pushkar and other 
places. The ancient village schemes and town plans have been super 
imposed by foreign invaders almost out of recognition. But historians 


1 See Chap. IX. 
77 


CLASSICAL ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


like Fergusson have endeavoured to illustrate northern Brahmanical 
civil architecture by referring to certain cenotaphs, ghats (landings) 
reservoirs, dams, and modern palaces at Gwalior, Chitor, Amber 
and other places. But no dwelling-houses for ordinary people could 
be traced or reconstructed from archaeological remains. 

The Dravidian architecture, also, is illustrated mostly by temples at 
Elura, Pattadakal, Dharwar, Mamallapuram, Conjeevaram, Tanjore, 
Tiruvalur, Srirangam, Chidambaram, Ramesvaram, Madura, 'Tinne- 
velly, Kumbakonam, Vellor, Perur and other places, as also by the 
civil architecture comprising palaces at Chandragiri, Madura and 
Tanjore, and Garden Pavilion at Vijayanagara. The illustrations of 
the Chalukyan architecture consist of the temples at Somanathpur, 
Belur, Halebid, and Dharwar, and memorial pillars at Worangul, 
Mysore and other places. The Pallava architecture is illustrated 
by the rock-cut temples excavated in the Districts of Trichinopoly, 
Chingleput, North Arcot, and South Arcot, and also by the ruins 
of the city of Mahendravadi, and of a great reservoir, the Mahendra 
tank, on the bank of which exists a Vishnu temple. Thus the 
archaeological sources can supply only an imperfect and insufficient 
survey of Hindu architecture. In order to get an unbiased and more 
complete idea of our ancient architecture the literary sources are 
indispensable. Almost a perfect account, with full details of all 
varieties of architecture, namely, religious and civil as well as 
military, is available from the literary sources, commencing with 
the epics and concluding with the numerous avowedly architectural 
treatises, one of which, the Mdnasdra, attained the recognized 
position of a standard work and appears to have regulated the art 
and architecture of the whole country until it became subjugated by 
foreigners for mere political reasons. 

The Epics 

The Epics furnish Copious description of cities, storeyed buildings, 
balconies, porticos, triumphal arches, enclosing walls, flights of stone 
masonry steps for tanks and a variety of other structures, all indica- 
tive of a flourishing architecture in the country. 

The plan of the city of Ayodhya is strikingly similar to the town- 
plan given in the Manasara and other architectural treatises.1 ‘ The 
temples (devdyatana) in this city (Ayodhya) were as resplendent as 


1 See writer’s Encyclopaedia under Wagara, 


78 


INDIA AND ABROAD BRAHMANICAL ARCHITECTURE 


the sky. Its assembly halls, gardens, and water-sheds or alms-houses 
(prapd) were most elegant ; and everywhere were arranged extensive 
buildings crowded with men and women. . . . The houses were as 
mines of gems, and the abodes of the goddess of fortune. The 
steeples (Skhara) of the houses were as resplendent as the crests of 
mountains and bore hundreds of pavilions (vimana) like the celestial 
palace of the chief among the Devas. The rooms were full of riches 
and corn, exquisitely gilt and decorated, and seemed as charming 
as pictures ; and they were so arranged that men could pass from one 
room to another without perceiving any inequality (in the floor).’? 

The Mahabharata contains short but comprehensive accounts of 
the cities of Dvaraka (III, 15), Indraprastha (1, 207, goff.), a floating 
city (III, 173, 3), Mithila (III, 207, 7), and others. 

In the Sabhd-parvan there are interesting descriptions of some 
assembly halls. Maya built an assembly hall for the Pandavas 
(Chapter I). A description is given also of the assembly halls of Indra 
(Chapter VII), of Yama (Chapter VIII), of Varuna (Chapter IX), 
of Kubera (Chapter X), and of Brahman (Chapter XI). 

These are poetic descriptions, but they must have been based on 
similar objects actually seen by the poets. 

A large number of houses were needed for the accommodation of 
the kings invited to Indraprastha on the occasion of King Yudhish- 
thira’s royal feast, Rdasdya, and the poet describes the lodgings 
assigned to the guests : ‘ O king, these and many other princes of the 
middle country (India proper) came to the great ceremonial, Rdjasiya, 
of the sons of Pandu. By order of the virtuous monarch to them 
were assigned dwellings replete with refreshments of every kind, and 
having by them charming lakes and ranges of ornamental plants. 
. . . Those houses were lofty as the peaks of the Kailaga mountain, 
most charming in appearance, and provided with excellent furniture. 
They were surrounded on all sides by well-built high walls of a white 
colour. The windows were protected by golden lattices and decorated 
with a profusion of jewellery. The stairs were easy of ascent; the 
rooms were furnished with commodious seats, and clothing, and 
garlands ; and the whole was redolent with the perfume of the finest 
agallochum. The houses were white as the goose, bright as the moon, 
and looked most picturesque even from a distance of four miles. They 

1 Ramayana, 1, 5, 10-15. Compare also the description of Lankakanda (V1), 
Sarga III. 


79 


CLASSIGAL ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


were free from obstructions, provided with doors of uniform height, 
but of various quality, and inlaid with numerous metal ornaments, 
even as the peak of the Himalaya. The princes were refreshed By the 
very sight of those mansions.”! 

* In the story of Nala, allusion is made toa lofty balcony from which 
men were seen from a great. distance ; and in the Ramdyana, Man- 
thara . . . lonks out from an upper window of the palace to notice 
the rejoicings of the people in the street on the nomination of Rama 
to the vice-kingship of Kofgala.”? . 

‘In the city (described in the Epics) special palaces existed for the 
king, the princes, the chief priests, ministers, and military. officers. 
Besides these and humble dwellings (the larger houses being divided 
into various courts),* there were. various assembly halls, courts of 
justice, and the booths of small-traders, with goldsmith’s Shap) and 
the work-places. of other artisans.”* 

‘The words ‘torana, arched. gateway ; harmya, masonry house ; 
devayatana, temple ; sabhd, assembly hall; prdsdda,. palace ;. Sikhara, 
steeple ; and wmdna,. pavilion, in‘ the above. extract (from the Rdand- 
yana) are noteworthy: None of, them. can:-consistently be applied 
to huts and thatched houses for which the: poets. invariably .use 
different words. Prurient fancy may extol and .exaggerate, but. it 
never suffices to create names of ‘material objects which the fanciful 
have never seen or heard of; a Ruskin may.’ amuse himself-and his 
readers: by building an imaginary palace in the air,* but his ideas are 
always of the earth, earthly, taken fom material objects with which 
he is: familiar. a A® oo 

plihe Pura nas : 

‘The Paeaitin generally deal’ with the subject of architecture in 
greater detail than the classes of literature referred:to-above. Casual 
references like those given‘aboye from the preceding classes. of litera- 
ture are frequently met with in all.the nineteen great ES ? Some 

1 Mahabharata, As, Soc. Edition, y p. 354+, a 

2 R. L. Mitra, Indo-Aryans, I,:p. ar. . 7 


3 Compare the Manasara, under Prakara, i in the writer’ s Bpaelcnartie 


Compare ‘These courts have mosaic pa’ ts of 
Mbh, 1, 185, 20; II, 33 and S4)e pavements of gold UR, VI, 37; 27, 58, 


* Hopkins, fj. A. 0. S., 13, under City, 
5 The Queen of the Air, by John Ruskin, 1869. 
s » Mitra, Indo-Aryans, pp.’ 22-23, Pa? 
"a, FZ (also called ATR), AeA, fervor, ara, TH, . TRS, ‘ee wa, fara, 
qe, ATHISA, Ae, aa, fos, aH, Tavs, Faaad and wfyez | 


80 


INDIA AND ABROAD BRAHMANICAL ARCHITECTURE 


nine Purdnas have, however, treated the subject more systematically, 
and have materially contributed to the later Silpa-Sastras themselves. 
The Matsya-Purdna, for instance, has eight comprehensive chapters 
dealing in great detail with architecture and sculpture.1 In one of 
these chapters accounts are given of eighteen ancient architects.? 
One chapter is devoted to the column, which is the regulator of 
the whole composition of a building.? Columns are divided into five 
classes, as in the western system, and their component parts into eight 
mouldings exactly like those of the Greco-Roman orders.* Buildings 
are described in two chapters together with their architectural details, 
such as plans, measures, classifications, pavilions, halls, storeys, steeples, 
and cupolas.® Some of the building materials are also discussed in 
a separate chapter. The remaining three chapters are devoted 
exclusively to sculpture.? One of these deals with a very technical 
subject, namely, the ¢alamdna or proportionate measures of an image® ; 
and in the other two the images of the Phallus and its Pedestal are 
described. 

The Shanda, which is another early Purdna, has devoted three 
chapters to the subject. One of these refers to the laying out of a large 
city.? In another, mention is made of the construction of a golden 
hall and three chariots in accordance with the descriptions supplied, 
and the names of the architects are added.t° The details of the con- 
struction of a special pavilion for the wedding of a royal princess is 
described in another chapter wherein reference is made to the painting 
also.12 Sculpture is associated with architecture; but painting is 
hardly mentioned in these works. 

1 Chapters 252, 255, 257, 258, 262, 263, 269 and 270. 

2 See p. 245. 

3 Chapter 255, RIAA | 


4 For details, see pp. 228, 230. 

5 Chapters 269 (sraTe@etT) , and 270 (AUSTSAT ) 

6 Chapter 257, <T4text | 

7 Chapters 258 (aaqmTewaT), 292 (Hearst), and 263 (fossteetr). 

8 For details, see p. 199- 3 ; ; 

9 qrgqqeave, Part Il, Chapter 25—eatt faxave ate Prater TeMTTTTITT | 

logepqqus, Part II, Chapter 25—fifawafeaarretet Yat Seay 
qarfrtrar TaorarreTha Torey, | aTeareat_faxara or SAAMI | TT CAST ATR 
ato EAA | aera TRAIT atraTT | j raiuiee 

apeqcate, Part I, Chapter 24—fertoat TayqTat faarert Tra let Geet 
faraadaret qdaverrniomicasiny, | fatenrst Aga wdaaattafataafaeare ear 
aagi tara TeHTATIA: | 


CLASSICAL ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


The Garuda-Puréna makes some valuable additions to the contri- 
butions of this class of literature to architecture. One of the four 
chapters devoted to this subject deals systematically with all the three 
classes of buildings, namely, residential, military and religious, as well 
as with the laying out of pleasure gardens and pavilions therein. 
Thus, in this chapter residential buildings, forts and fortified towns, 
temples and monasteries are described along with garden-houses.* 
The following chapter treats exclusively of religious buildings.? The 
remaining two chapters are devoted to sculpture, one dealing with 
rules regarding the construction of an image and the other with the 
installation of images in temples.° 

The Agni, among all the Puranas, has dilated on the subject at 
great length. There are sixteen chapters of which one deals with 
town-planning, two with residential buildings and the remaining 
thirteen with sculpture.. The importance of its contributions to the 
Silpa-Sastra lies, however, specially in two things. First, it seems to 
have been aware of the Manasara, the standard work on architecture.* 
Secondly, its chapter on town-planning is a real addition to the 
Puranas’ contributions to architecture.® Temples and residential build- 
ings are described in two chapters.® The treatment of sculpture also 
is unique, and is the most exhaustive of all the accounts given in the 
Puranas. It deals with almost all classes of religious images, both 
of male and female deities, as well as of those not falling under either 
of these categories. Thus, of the thirteen chapters on sculpture, one 
is devoted to the description.of the sun-god and his attendants,’ one 
to the ten incarnations of Vishnu,® two others also to Vishnu under 
the name of Vasudeva,® one to the guardian angel of the house,}° 


1 Chapter 46 TATA gh caro AOT ATTA ATA ST TA, | 
2 Chapter 47—STarafoeraveartay’ TTT | 
8 Chapters 45—remMrafdwertay, and 48—eatat sfatarfata: | 
‘Compare aged A Aad Ach waver ArTaleaT | (Chapter 42, verse 16) 
Gelat Afeat card BBSl ATTA: | (Chapter 104, verse 11). 
For details, see later p. 250. 
5 Chapter 106— 
° Chapters 42—SralewetTaaay, and 104—9TaTeserTy | 
For details, see later p. 189-190. 
7 Chapter 51— aa fast faareearre, | 
8 Chapter 4gQ—Arealeeraareaaty | 
9 Chapters 44—aTaeattenfaar, and 60. -qrgearfenfacerfafe: | 
10 Chapter 43—7 \ 


82 


INDIA AND ABROAD BRAHMANICAL ARCHITECTURE 


one to the goddess of fortune,! two to the female deities in general,? 
four to the Phallus and its Pedestal,’ and the remaining one to the 
stone gods, Salagrama and others. 

The Narada-Puréna practically completes the Purénas’ contributions 
to architecture. In a single chapter it describes the construction of 
pools, wells, and tanks, as well as temples. The Litga-Purana supple- 
ments the contributions by adding an account of the construction of 
sacrificial pits, together with a description of temples and the installa- 
tion of deities therein.® 

The Vayu, which is one of the very early Purdnas, maintains its 
unique position by dealing with the construction of various temples 
built upon mountain tops.? Examples of these temples are still found 
on several peaks of the Himalaya and the Vindhya ranges. For the 
Brahmanda-Purdna there was very little left to add. Ina single chapter 
it describes the construction of temples and residential buildings.® 

The Bhavishya, partly a late Purana, has also nothing new to con- 
tribute. Three of its chapters are devoted to sculpture.® Architec- 
ture proper, comprising the description of temples, is treated in a 
single chapter.'° The most striking feature of this Purana is that the 
number, name, and other architectural details of the buildings 
described in it are identical with the twenty types found in the Matsya- 
Purana, and the Brthat-samhita of Varahamihira.11 

The Brahma-vaivarta Purdna has referred to the subject of archi- 
tecture in some eleven chapters.!2 The cities of Dvaraka, Mathura - 
Vrindavana, and Golaka are described in five chapters.18 The 


et Chapter 62—weriafaarfate: 1 
2 Chapters 5024 fTATeATT, and 59—Aa Thre | 
8 Chapters 53—festTmamy, 54—feararafenaty, 45—fafteateemy, and 55— 
fatterrearraty | 


4 Chapter 46—emrayiawey, | 

5 Part I, Chapter 1g— Aaa ATTA HATS aA Ly ale 

® Part II, Chapter 4o—aNgrslaaranatgas aaa sarat eaafatairerTy | 

7 Part I, Chapter 39—aoleadlalaacaroaalaay | 

8 Chapter 7—Tellaftairy 1 e 

®The Madhya-parvan, Chapter 12—Nasaara fraser rao Tr \ 

The Brahma-parvan, Chapters 131—Afaearay, and 1 32—SftaTaTay, I 

10 The Brahma-parvan, Chapter 130 —MaleoaT arty | 

11 For details, see pp. 190-195, 244. 

12 §7i-Krishna-janma-khanda, Chapters 2, 4, 5, 6, 10, 17, 72, 92, 103, 104 and 
128, 

18 Chapters 103, 104 (vv. 6-22), 72 (vv. 2-14), 17 (vv. 14-27), 4 (vv. 73-169). 


83 


CLASSICAL ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


residential houses of Radha, Kubja, and Nanda are referred to in 
three chapters. The cars and the dancing court (rdsa-mandala) are 
described in five chapters.” 

The Brihat-sanhita, usually classed under the astronomical and 
astrological treatises, is but a semi-Purdna, dealing, as it does, with 
heterogeneous subjects like the Puranas themselves. Its authorship is 
attributed to Varahamihira, who is supposed to be one of the nine 
traditional gems in the court of a mythical Vikramaditya,® and is thus 
stated to be a contemporary of Kalidasa, a poet of unrivalled fame. 
In this treatise there are but five chapters devoted to both architecture 
and sculpture. But the subjects have been treated with a master hand. 
The chapters open with a definition of the science of architecture, and 
the author goes on to describe, briefly but succinctly and to the point, 
the suitable building sites, testing of soil, general plan, comparative 
measures of storeys and doors, and carvings thereon, and other im- 
portant parts of a building. The preliminary subjects are described 
in the opening chapter.* Then follows the description of the buildings 
proper, under the same twenty types as in the Matsya- and the 
Bhavishya-Purdnas, the names and details being identical.® ‘The pre- 
paration of cement is discussed in a separate chapter.* One whole 
chapter is devoted to the construction of the necessary articles of 
house-furniture, such as bedsteads, couches, and seats.? Quite consis- 
tently with his sense of proportion Varahamihira devotes only one 
chapter to sculpture, where, too, the details of images are described in 
a scientific manner which is missing in other ancient literature. He 
is, however, accused of being ‘ in the habit of uncritically copying 
his authorities* and misappropriating their materials. But in his 
treatise seven architectural authorities are mentioned distinctly.® 


+ Chapters 5 (vv. 1-87), 92 (vv. 10-11, 41-60) and 72 (vv. 29-31). 


2 Chapters 2 (vv. 8), 6 (vv. » 34> i 
ee ees 39-58), 6 (vv. 99-105), 10 (vv. 34-37), 128 (vv. 38-41) 


° For the names of the nine gems, see 
Pp. 241, note 1. 
* Chapter 53—aTeafaerr | j 
® Chapter 56—STaTe@eT 
; ae fuller details, see pp. 192, 193, 194. 
apter 57—T 11 
‘ Chapter 79—TATA Se | 
% Chapter 58—TTAT HTT | 
°aRMt and Aq (LVI, 30-31), 
(LI, 29), afore, (LVIII, 4, 15) and 44 (LI, 29 ; LVII, 8). 


84. 


afas (LVIM, 8), WRX (LVIII, 52), faraaa © 


INDIA AND ABROAD BRAHMANICAL ARCHITECTURE 


The Agamas 


The term Agama generally implies a traditional doctrine or precept, 
a sacred writing or scripture, and hence the Vedas. But there is a 
special class of work inculcating the mystical worship of Siva and 
Sakti like the Tantras : they belong to South India and are known as 
the Agamas.1 They are encyclopaedic works like the Puranas, whose 
ultimate object is also to discuss the worship of the Triad. The 
Purdnas, however, deal with all the three deities forming the holy 
Trinity, although Vishnu has received preference, and to his worship 
fourteen of the Puranas are devoted. The Agamas, on the other hand, 
deal mostly with Siva. Obviously they are intended to represent the 
Puranas of South India. These Agamas of Dakshindtya are in fact more 
extensive than the Purdnas of Arydvarta. There are as many as twenty- 
eight recognized Agamas,? while the number of the great Purdnas is 
not more than eighteen or nineteen.® 

The Agamas, like the Puranas, incidentally deal with architectural 
subjects; their contributions to the Silpa-sastra are, however, more 
extensive and valuable. Some of the Agamas deal with very technical 
matters, which are not met with in the Purdnas. Moreover, some 
Agamas to all intents and purposes are but architectural treatises. 
The Kamikdgama, for instance, devotes sixty chapters out of a total 
of seventy-five to architecture and sculpture, and its treatment of the 
subjects can hardly be surpassed by that of an avowedly architectural 
treatise. Just like a Silpa-Sdstra it begins systematically with the pre- 
liminary matters, such as the testing and preparation of soil, selection 
of sites, scheme of measurement and the finding out of the cardinal 
points by means of gnomons for the orientation of buildings, and the 
site-plans. Buildings proper are described under twenty types, just as 


1 Compare the traditional definition of the Agama : 
amd wad, Td a fife | 
aa 4 ager THAT Ut 
2 (1) arfranm, (2) griara, (3) atm, (4) fara, (5) wer, (6) 
afsranta, (7) dear, (8) gerry, (9) waar, (10) siqaranra, (11) faw- 
amin, (12) frxarani, (13) sarryan, (14) sfaarta, (15) farm, (16) 
ara, (17) aEeTM, (18) farerm, (19) waar, (20) fararra, (21) 
Sahara, (22) sfearr, (23) faarT, also called FaTTaTTA, (24) ARTATTA, 
(25) wdtrari, (26) TRACT, (27) fect, (28) ager, 
There are several other lists of these works. But this one appears to be the 
most authentic. 
8 See above, p. 80, note 7. 


85 


CLASSICAL ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


in the Matsya- and Bhavishya-Purdnas, as well as in the Brihat-sarhita. 
But, unlike the Purdnas, there is in the Kamikadgama a discussion of 
architectural matters under some very highly technical classifications, 
such as the styles, Nagara, Dravida, and Vesara; shapes, masculine, 
feminine, and neuter; Suddha, Misra, and Samkirna, depending 
respectively on a single material, mixture of two materials, and 
the amalgamation of many materials; Sarhtchita, Asarchita, and 
Apasamchita, otherwise known as Sthanaka, Asana, and Sayana, which, 
in case of temples, depend on the erect, sitting, and reclining 
postures of the image.1 Another very technical matter referred to is 
dyadi formulas, so very important in selecting the right proportions.? 
For the close similarity of this Agama with the Silpa-sdstras it is, how- 
ever, necessary to glance over the following fajalas or chapters 
together with the corresponding chapters of the standard Silpa- 
sastra, the Manasara, which is referred to in more detail elsewhere in 
this volume? : 
11. Bhi-parilsha-vidhi—examination of soil (Mdnasdra, Chapter IV 
bearing the same title). 
12. Pravesa-bali-vidhi—ofterings (M., VIII). 
13. Bhii-parigraha-vidhi—selection of site (M., V). 
14. Bhi-karshana-vidhi—ploughing the site (M., V). 
15. Sanku-sthapana-vidhi—gnomons (M., V1). 
16. Mdanopakarana-vidhi—system of measurement (M., II). 
17. Pada-vinydsa—site-plan (M., VII). 
18. Sitra-nirmdna—making cord (M., II). 
19. Vastu-deva-bali—offerings to the guardian angel of the house 
(M., VIII), cf. 12. 
20. Grdmadi-lakshana—laying out villages and towns (M., IX, X). 
21. Vistarayama-lakskapa—dimensions (M., XI). 
22. ile special kind of architectural and sculp- 
tural measurement used in i i 
(i, LXV), selecting the right proportion 
24. Dandika-vidhidealing with d “ 
XXXVIII, XXXTX, XXXII). ea eaa 
25. Vithi-dvdradi-mana—roads and doors (M., IX, X, XX XTX). 


1 - . . 5 
For fuller information, consult the writer’s Encyclopaedia under these terms, 
and also see pp. 187, 195. 


2 For details, see the writer’s En 
p- 279, note I. 


* See Chapter IV, pp. 97-158. 


cyclopaedia under Shadvarga, and also see 


86 


INDIA AND ABROAD BRAHMANICAL ARCHITECTURE 


26. 


28. 


29. 


30. 


Gramdadi-devata-sthapana—temples in villages and towns (MM., 
IX, X). 

Gramadi-vinydsa—more details on villages and towns (M., IX, 
XX) cha 20; 

SE ae details on site-plan (M., VII), 
chan. 

Gramdadi-anga-sthana-nirmana—more details on villages and 
towns (M., IX, X), cf. 20, 26, 28. 

Garbha-nydsa—foundations (M., XII). 

Bala-sthapana-vidhi—the installation of Bala—not mentioned 
in M. 

Grama-griha-vinyésa—the arrangement of houses in villages 
and towns (M., IX, X), cf. 20, 26, 28, 30. 

Vastu-Santi-vidhi—not mentioned in M. 

Sala-lakshana-vidhi—halls, etc. (M., XX XV). 

Visesha-lakshana-vidhi—not mentioned in M. 

Doi-sala-lakshana-vidhihouses with two compartments, in 
many places in M. 

Chatuh-Sala-lakshana-vidhi—houses with four compartments, 
in many places in M. 

Vardhamdana-sala-lakshana—more details on Salas (M., XXXV), 
cf. 35, 37> 38. 

Nandydvarta-vidhimore details on Salas (M., XXXV), 
cf. 35, 37, 38) 40. 

Svastika-vidhi—more details on Salas (M., XXXV), cf. 35, 
37, 38, 40, 41. 

Paksha-§ala-vidhi—more details on side-halls or ante-chambers 
(M., XXXV), cf 35, 375 38, 40, 41, 42. 

Asti (Hasti) sala-vidhi—more details on Salas (M., XXXV), cf. 
35, 37> 38> 40 41, 42, 43- 

Malika-lakshana-vidhi—a special kind of buildings (cf M., 
XIX to XXX). 

Langala-malika-vidhi—more details on Malika buildings, cf. 45. 

Maulika-malika-vidhi—more details on Malika buildings, 
cf. 45, 46. 

Padma-malika-vidhi—more details on Malika buildings, cf. 45, 
46, 47- : 

Nagaradi-vidhi—not separately treated in M. 

Bhimi-lamba-vidhi—dimensions of storeys (M., XI). 


87 


CLASSICAL ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


51. 


Adyeshtaka-vidhana-vidhi—aying the foundation stone, in many 
places in M. 

Upapitha-vidhi—pedestals (M., XIII). 

Pada-mana-vidhi—pillars (M., XV). 

Prastara-vidhi—entablatures (M., XVI). 

Prasada-bhushana-vidhi—the articles of house furniture (A/., L). 

Kantha-lakshana-vidhi—the neck parts of buildings, in many 


places in M. 

Sikhara-lakshana-vidhithe top parts of buildings, in many 
places in M. 

Stipika-lalshana-vidhi—steeples or domes of buildings, in many 
places in M. 


Naladi-sthapana-vidhi—construction of water-ways and drains, 
in many places in M. 

Eka-bhumyadi-vidhi—buildings of one and more storeys (MM., 
XIX-XXX). 

Mirdhni-sthapana-vidhi—construction of tops of buildings, in 
many places in M. 

Linga-lakshana-vidhi—the Phallus (M., LI). 

Ankurarpana-vidhi—iiterally sowing the seed, not separately 
treated in M, 

Linga-pratishtha-vidhi—installation of the Phallus (M., LIT). 

Pratima-lakshana-vidhii—images (M., LXIV, etc.). 

Devata-sthapana-vidhi—installation of images of deities (/Z., 
LI, LIV, LV, LVI, LXIV, etc.). 

Pratima-pratishtha-vidhi—more details on images, ie 65, 67. 

Vimana-sthapana-vidhi—buildings (M., XVIII). 

Mandapa-sthapana-vidhi—pavilions (M., XXXIV). 

Prakara-lakskana-vidhi—courts and enclosures (M., XXXI). 

Parivara-sthapana-vidhitemples of attendant deities (M., 
XXXII). | 

Vrishabha-sthapana-vidhithe bull, the riding animal of Siva 
(M., LXII). 


Gopura-sthapana-vidhi—the construction of gate-houses (M., 
XXXII). 


The Karandgama also devotes much space to architecture and sculp- 
ture. There are thirty-seven chapters in this Agama, which deal with 
those subjects exhaustively. It makes a distinct addition to the 
Agamas’ contributions to the Silpa-Sdstras. It contributes two valuable 


88 


INDIA AND ABROAD 


BRAHMANICAL ARCHITECTURE 


chapters dealing with the details of the nine and ten tala measures. 
This 1s also a highly technical matter concerning sculpture and entirely 
missing in the Puranas. This Agama also has close similarities with the 
Manasara, which will appear, however imperfectly, from the following 
list of chapters : 

Part I, chapters (patalas)— 


3. 


4. 


5: 
6. 


56. 


59: 


1For detail, cons 


Vastu-vinydsa—classification of building-sites (Mdanasara, Vastu- 
prakarana, Chapter IIT). 

Adyeshtaka-vidhi—laying the foundation stone, mentioned in 
many places in M. 

Adhishthdna-vidhi—bases (M., XIV). 

Garbha-nyasa-vidhifoundations (M., XII). 

Prasada-lakshana-vidhi—buildings (cf. M., XVIII, XIX— 
XXX). 

Prakara-lakshana-vidhi—courts and enclosures (M., Chapter 
XXXII). 

Linga-lakshana-vidhi—the Phallus (M., LII). 

Mardhnishtaka-lakshana—ornaments at the topmost parts of 
buildings—in many places in M. 

Pratima-lakshana—images (M., LXIV, LI, LIV—LXII). 

Styi-mana-dasa-tala-lakshana—intermediate type of dasa (ten) 
tala measurement, used for the images of females (M., 
LXVI). 

Kanishtha-daga-tala-lakshana—the smallest type of dasa (ten) 
tala measurement (M., LIX). 

Nava-talottama-lakshana—the largest type of nava (nine) tala 
measurement (M., LIX). 

Bali-karma-vidhi—offerings (M., VIII). 

Mrit-samgrahana-vidhi—collection and preparation of soil (for 
images), not treated in a separate chapter in M. 

Ankurarpana-vidhi—iiterally sowing the seed, not treated in 
a separate chapter in M. 

Mahabhisheka-vidhigreat coronation or anointing (cf. M., 
XLIX). 

Vastu-homa-vidhi—sacrificial offerings in connexion with the 
construction of a house (cf. 16). 

Linga-sthapana-vidhi—installation of the Phallus (M., LIT), cf. 9. 


ult the writer’s Encyclopaedia under Talamana, and see 


pp- 149, 153-154- 


89 


CLASSICAL ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE 1N 


Go. Parivara-sthapana-vidhi—the temples of the attendant deities 
(M., XXXIT). 

61. Bali-pitha-pratishtha-vidhi—seat of sacrifice, not treated in a 
separate chapter in M. 

62. Ratna-linga-sthapana-vidhi—more details on the Phallus (cf. 

» 59): 

66. Pee ie rire details on the attendant deities (cf. 60). 

88. Bhakta-sthapana-vidhi—on the images of devotees (M., LIX). 

Mrit-samgrahaya—more details on the collection and prepara- 

tion of soil (cf. 19). 


Part II, chapters (patalas)— 
Kila-partksha—the nail at the top, not separately treated in M. 


4 

5 Gopura-vidhana—gate-houses (M., XXXII). 
6. Mandapa-lakskana—pavilions (M., XXXIV). 
as Pitha-lakshana—pedestals (M., XIII, LITT). 
8 
9 
I 


136. 


Sakti-lakshana—female deities (M., LIV). 
Grama-santi-vidhi—villages (M., DX, X). 
Mrit-samgrahana—more details on soil (cf. Part I, 19, 136). 

12. Ankurarpana—more details on sowing the seed (cf. Part I, 20). 

13. Bimba-suddhi—purification of idols, not treated separately in a 

chapter in M. 
14. Kautulca-bandhana—experimental yoking for the purpose of 
ploughing the building-site (44., V). 

15. Nayanonmilana—chiselling the eyes (M., LXX). 

18. Bimba-suddhi—purification of idols (cf. II, 13). 

19. Sayandropana—bedsteads (M., XLIV). 

20. Siva-litiga-sthapana—more details on the Phallus (cf. I, 9, 59): 

98. Matha-pratishtha—monasteries, not separately treated in M. 

The Suprabhedagama has devoted not more than fifteen chapters to 
architecture and sculpture. Nor has it anything new to add to the 
Agamas’ contributions to the Silpa-sastras. But its unique nature con- 
sists in the fact that it has quite successfully summarized all important 
matter in a comparatively small space,! and in respect of brevity, 
explicitness, and precision it surpasses even the Brihat-samhita of 
Varahamihira.? This Agama has apparently drawn upon a Silpa-Sastra. 
Its similarities with the Mdanasdra, discussed elsewhere in detail,® 
may be partly apparent from the following list of its chapters read 


1 See p. 196. 2 See pp. 194-195. 3 See pp. 187-189, 194-195: 
go 


INDIA AND ABROAD 


BRAHMANICAL ARCHITECTURE 


together with the corresponding portions of the standard Silpa-fastra 
mentioned above : 


22. 


23. 
26. 


27). 
28. 


29. 
30. 


31. 
32. 


33- 
34. 


3) 
36. 
aye 
8k 


39- 
4.0. 


Karanadhikara-lakshana—on the constructive arts, dealing with, 
ushnisha (head gear), dsana (seat, chair), paryanka (bedstead, 
couch), simhdsana (throne), raga (courtyard, theatre), and 
stambha (column), (Mdnasara, XLIX, XLIV, XLV, XLVII 
OVetc.) 
Gramdadi-lakshana-vidhi—villages and towns (M., TX, X). 
Tarundlaya-vidhi—a special kind of building, not separately 
mentioned in a chapter in M. 
Prasdda-vastu-vidhi—buildings in general (M., XVIII, XIX— 
Adyeshtaka-vidhi—laying the foundation stone, mentioned in 
many places in M. 

Garbha-nyasa-vidhi—foundations (M., XII). 

Anguli-lakshana-vidhithe angula (finger-breadth) measure- 
ment (cf. M., II, LV). 

Prasada-lakshana-vidhi-more details on buildings (cf. 27). 

Mirdhnishtaka-vidiian ornament on the topmost part of 
buildings in many places in M. 

Linga-lakshana-—the Phallus (M., LIT). 

Sakala-lakshana-vidhi—images of Isvara and other deities (M., 
LI—LXIV). 

Ankurarpana-vidhi—sowing the seed, not treated in a separate 
chapter in M. 

Linga-pratishtha-vidhi—installation of the Phallus (M., LIT) ; 
GH GR 

Sakala-pratishtha-vidhi—installation of the images of Isvara 
and other deities (cf. 34). 

Sakti-pratishtha-vidhi—installation of the images of the female 
deities (/., LIV). 

Parivara-vidhi—temples of attendant deities (M., XXXII). 

Vrishabha-sthapana-vidhi—the image of the Bull of Siva (M., 
LxII 


The Vaikhanasagama has two chapters on sculpture, one of which 
deals with the general description of images and the other with the 
ten-igla measures.1 The Arisumad-bhedagama” has a single chapter 


1 qe (Chapter) eo—TaATSAT, and 4g—Saratale | 


2 There is an architectural treatise bearing the title aU, the author. ship of 
which is attributed to Kasyapa. Consult the writer’s Encyclopaedia, Appendix, 


and see pp. 162-165. 


gi 


CLASSICAL ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


on the ten-idla measures.’ Instances like those given above can 
be culled from the remaining Agamas also, but the multiplication 
of illustrations is not likely to furnish any new information. It is, 
however, clear that architecture was a favourite subject for the 
authors of the Agamas. 


Miscellaneous Treatises 


The works on royal polity deal with architectural matters in a more 
than casual way. The Kautiliya Artha-Sasira, for instance, devotes 
some seven chapters to the subject, containing a large number of 
structural details. There are interesting descriptions of forts, fortified 
cities, town-planning, and military and residential buildings.” 

The Sukra-niti deals with both architectural and sculptural objects. 
Rules and structural details are given together with interesting descrip- 
tions of forts and fortified towns, of temples and other kinds of build- 
ings, and of various sorts of images. In this treatise sculptural details 
are more numerous in some respects than even in the Silpa-§astras. 
Repair of broken images, for instance, is an important matter in 
sculpture, which has been dealt with in detail in this treatise. Another 
important contribution made by the Sukra-niti to the Silpa-Sastras is the 


1 42% (Chapter) 28 —SaraaaTotare: | 

2 Chapter 2214 FHA | og —afufeoafaart | 2g —gtlaaTT | 2 5— ahaa | 
The last two deal with the laying out of fortified towns and forts. 65—AKT?; 
TATE (residential and military buildings). 66—ARG 747, ararfaare, HATATATTT, 
etc. For full details, see the writer’s Encyclopaedia under Durga, Nagara, and Grama. 

3 Chapter IV, Section 4: 


(1) aqufacfratteraeat—the construction of temples and other kinds 
of buildings. For details of royal palaces, see the concluding portion 
of Chapter I. 


(2) sear ita ereaaet—carving images in general. 

(3) sia? ateattateraeat—the images of the riding animals of deities. 

(4) TOT A A TAAeAT—the image of Ganapati. 

(5) afrra iat Trae —images of the female deities. 

(6) aTaA ata MoAAET—images of Bala (child Krishna). 

(7) 4 SUTIC ESTs frareraetI—the images measured in the seven 
(sapta) and other ala measurements. 

(8) FardtalaftarteraeatI—the images of the demonesses. 

(9) Weasttaareaiteracal—the repair of the damaged images. 


(x0) SearaqeaaT <A AT41—Festival in connexion with installation of images. 
Section 6— 


(11) gi frrt—the construction of forts (and forti 
For full details, see the writer’s Encyclopaedia es ue 


92 


INDIA AND ABROAD BRAHMANICAL ARCHITECTORE 


description of the seven-tala measures which are generally applicable, 
both in India and the West, to well-proportioned human figures only. 

Avowedly historical works are not numerous in Sanskrit. Of the 
two treatises, one is concerned with the reign of a single king, and the 
other with the events of a country, covering many reigns. In both 
Bee treatises architecture has been given its already well-recognized 

ace. 
The Harsha-charita is a history of Harshavardhana of Kanavj, 
during whose reign the famous Chinese traveller Hieun Tsang visited 
India. In this history it is stated that ‘ the palace had, besides the 
harem, always more than three courtyards; the outer one being 
for people and for state reception, the next inner one for chiefs or 
nobles, and the third one for intimate persons only. The palaces 
were stately buildings, though not of stone. The floors, however, are 
described as made of shining stones. The columns and walls were 
ornamented with gold and even precious stones. There was usually 
a several-storeyed building with inner gardens of flower-beds and 
large fruit trees.’1 Mention is made also of detached buildings like 
the mandapas or pavilions for the purposes of sabha (council hall), 
satra (inn), prapa (water sheds), and pragvamga (an auxiliary shed to 
a sacrificial room).? The useful articles of house furniture, such as 
thrones (sirthdsana), couches (Sayana), and asandi, meaning chairs, are 


also described.® : ; ; 
The Raja-tarangini of Kalhana, dealing with the history of Kashmir, 


refers frequently to architectural objects like castles (bana-sala) ,* 
monumental buildings (chaitya),° and monasteries (vtharas).6 But 
in these references very few structural details are to be met with. 
The references of Kalhana to temples and other buildings also gene- 
rally lack constructive details.? But interesting structural details 
of some shrines merely referred to in Kalhana’s work are elaborated 


1 Hist Medieval India, Vaidya, p. 152. See Harsha-charita, p- 215-216, 
fearon one palace of Prabhakara Vardhana of ThaneSvara. 


2 Harsha-charita, p. 176. , = $ 
afer faa anemTe AAA TACT TAT ATA: | 


See also ibid, p- 137: . 
3H. C., p. He ibid, 153- 4 VIII, 1666. 
5T, 103, 1703 III, 380, 381 ; IV, 200, 204. ee 
ST, 93, 94 98, 103; 140-144, 146, 147, 169, 199, cee > ) Sn? 13, 14, 355» 

380, 464, 476 3 IV, 79, 184; 188, 200, 210, 215, 216, 262, 507; WI, 171, 175, 303 5 

VII. 696, 1336 ; VII, 246, 248, 2402, 2410, 2417, 2 31, 2433, 3343, 3352; 3353. 

te Compare, e.g., the Sarada temple (1, 37) 5 arada-sthana (VIII, 2554, 


2706), etc. 
93 


CLASSICAL ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


by Major C. R. Bates in the Gazetieer of Kashmir’ and have been 
given in a note by Sir M. A. Stein.? 

The astrological and astronomical treatises frequently refer to 
architectural topics, especially those bearing upon auspicious times. 
In a pamphlet of this class twenty-one things are stated to be observed 
in connexion with building a house.’ A famous astronomical treatise, 
the Garga-samhitad, deals with a large number of purely architectural 
subjects, such as the courts, compounds, compartments, rooms, dimen- 


sions, and location of doors.* ; 
The more authoritative works like the Sdrya-siddhanta,® the Sid- 


dhanta-Siromani,® and the Lildvati? deal exhaustively with a very 


+1, Gaye} 
2 * The temple is approached from the lower slope of the hill . . . by an impos- 
ing stone staircase . . . which leads up in sixty-three steps to the main entrance 


of the quadrangular court enclosing the temple. It is about 10 feet wide and rises 
rather steeply between two flanking walls of massive construction, broken in six 
steps or flights. The entrance to the court is through a gateway, provided with 
the usual double porch of Kasmirian architecture.’ 

‘The temple, which occupies the centre of the quadrangle, forms a square cella 
conforming in plan and elevation to the usual features of KaSmir architecture. 
It is raised on a basement 24 feet square and 5 teet 3 inches high. The walls 
of the cella proper recede about 2 feet from the edge of the basement. They are 
adorned on the north, east and south by trefoil arches and supporting pilasters both 
projecting in relievo. Below these arches are small trefoil-headed niches covered 
by double pediments.’ 

‘ The entrance to the interior of the cella is . . . approached by stairs 54 feet 
wide with flanking side walls. There is an open portico in front of the door pro- 
jecting about 4 feet beyond the pilasters on each side of the doorway. It is sup- 
ported on the outside by two pillars . . . The interior of the cella forms a square 
of 12 feet 3 inches, and has no decoration of any kind.’ 

—(Kalhana’s Rdjatarangini, Vol. TI, notes, p. 283 fol.). 

SAAT AAA SATII RTAT | 

weaa Uta afriarsiecar: 1 

antaret aert frida | 

mre awat wa wat UN 

meat ferrin samnerataarta: | 

aftatt frase: faecfatinpates u 
—(Laghu-Silpa-jyotih-sara, 3-5). 

4'The manuscript in the Trinity College, Cambridge, isin a mutilated condition. 
The contents of the first and second chapters, fols. 67-68, are almost illegible. 
The following are a little better : 

@) angaarat agimfrrmtrafata: (fol. Goa). 
(i) Tiamat ardiaaat agarerfafrarsaaerfati: (fol. Goa). 
(iii) aIeftea: (Chap. 3, fols. 57a and G68b). 
areramfates: (fol. 57b). 

: ARATE: (fol. Gob). (iv) TEXAN: (fol. 68b). 

Chapter III, 1-4. Chapter VII 36-49. 7? Part II, Chapter II, section vii, 


94 


INDIA AND ABROAD BRAHMANICAL ARCHITECTURE 


technical matter bearing upon architecture, namely, the description 
of gnomons which were used for finding out cardinal points. The 
subject is architecturally very important, inasmuch as it refers to the 
orierttation of buildings.? 

The poetical works of Magha, Kalidasa, Bhavabhiti, and others 
refer occasionally to architectural matters. In the Sts‘upadlavadha 
the sea-side city of Dvaraka, and the assembly halls and palaces of 
Yudhishthira and Krishna are described at length ; the ornaments for 
the body and weapons, cars and chariots are also referred to.? In the 
Vikramorvasiya, for instance, mention is made of a flight of stairs 
made like the waves of the Ganges ; in the Meghadita a market-place 
in Vigala and the city of Alaka are elaborately described.* The 
Uttara-Rama-charita refers to an architecturally important matter, 
namely, cement which is specially described in some Silpa-Sastras.* In 
the same work Nala, the son of the heavenly architect Visvakarman, 
is mentioned as an engineer who built the bridge joining India with 
Ceylon.® 

OF this class of works, the Mrichchhakatika, which deals with the 
ordinary affairs of wordly people, refers very frequently to architec- 
tural matters which are two numerous to be included here.® A very 
interesting description of the gateway and as many as eight courtyards 
into which the whole compound is divided is given in the fourth act. 


1 Compare the writer’s Encyclopaedia under Saku, and for full details, see 
. 100-101, 
III, 33-64, XIII, 51-63, H, 4-5; III, 2-11, 17-23, 27-28. 
3 TeaceenlepATaaT, see also afierat (Vikramorvasiya, Kale’s ed. 1898, 
Act III, p. 73) ; Meghadita, 1, 33-34; II ; 1-22. 
4qs1e%, Act III, preceding verse 40. 
5 Act III, verse 45. Compare the Ramayana Té7I"s, Chapter 22, verses 41-42. 
In the Manasdra also Nala is mentioned as an architect, see Manasara, Chapter II. 


6 Act I, Tatee!, threshold (verse 17) ; THAIX*, side entrance (38 ; also II, oe 


V, 129 ; VI, 209, 211, etc.) ; ATR, courtyard (39) > 
dovecot on the top palace (52; VIII, 282, 283 ; TX, 347, 349» 35% 351). 


Act II, afisacat, merchant quarters (88, 136); Teather, outer hall (101, 


117). 
‘et, inner court (107, 108, 109 ; VI, 204): 
qaxcen, SIYEH, baked and unbaked brick (111). 
Act V, ATHIR, fence (177) ; arerarararaatett, roof of the garden-house (177)+ 
Act VI, Sal#let%, main gate (216). 
Act IX, 4eI<A%ST court of justice (289, 291). 
AUAIAVST, court of justice (289, 302, 305, 397 32% etc.), 


Zara, grass lawn (291). 
95 


CLASSICAL ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE In 


This description is full of further architectural details. This reference 
is specially important owing to the fact that in the Manasara, as well 
as the Puranas and the Agamas, the compound, however big it may 
be, is divided into not more than five courts, the fourth of which 
is technically called Prakara in the Mdanasara. 

The construction of the play-house is referred to in the Natya-S4atra 
on dramaturgy, and several other texts on dancing, singing, and ins- 
trumental music. The WNdtya-Sastra of Bharata describes in great 
detail the stage proper and the auditorium. The audience-house, as 
it is designated, admits of three varieties, namely, the circular or 
semi-circular, quadrangular, and triangular pavilions. There is also 
given a similar account of the stage proper. On the two sides of 
it an entablature is raised over four pillars and green-rooms at 
the back and sides, and the platforms or theatre proper at the 
front are erected upon a higher level than the auditorium. Two of 
these three types of theatres have been referred to in the Vishnu- 
dharmottara. The Sarigita-makaranda® of Narada supplies an account 
of an unspecified type of the stage and the auditorium. The. 
Sangita-Ratnakara of Nihsanka-Sarngadeva® describes the auditorium 
alone. 

Traces of an advanced state of architecture are found also in works 
like grammars and lexicons. Yaska in his Nrukta mentions several 
words which can be used for masonry houses only.* In the later lexi- 
cons, like the Amarakosha, lists of several architectural terms are met 
with.® Derivations of words like bhdskara, sculptor ; ishtaka, brick ; 
stambha, pillar; attalika, edifices, are found in Panini’s grammar. 
They no doubt imply the existence of brick and stone buildings in 
those times.® 


1 Chapter IT, 7, 8, 25. 

2°V. 2-9. 

3 VII, 1351-61. 

4R. L. Mitra, Indo-Aryans, I, 25-26. 

® Amarakosha, section on towns and houses (Chapter II, section ii, named pura- 
varga, verses 1-2 ; pages 116-126, ed. Sivadatta, Bombay, 1915). 

6 Mitra, ibid, I, 19. 


96 


CHAPTER IV 
SILPA-SASTRAS 


A SUMMARY OF THE MANASARA! 
CHAPTER I 
Tue Taste oF Contents (Sarhgraha) 


THE FIRST VERSE is an invocation to Brahma, the Creator of the 
Universe. In the second verse it is stated that the science of archi- 
tecture (Vdastu-Sdstra) had come down from Siva, Brahma and 
Vishnu, through Indra, Brihaspati, Narada, and all other sages, to 
the seer (rishi) Manasara who systematized it. 

After this genesis, titles of the chapters are given in order. The 
colophon of the last chapter, named Nayanonmilana, in all the com- 
plete manuscripts gives the number of the chapter as 71. The 
manuscripts called I, the codex archetypus of my text, has made 
‘3 the number 71 by repeating the chapter Strimana-madhyama- 
asatala; in one place it is numbered 66 and in the second 67. The 
only explanation of this number 71 for the last chapter is to suppose 
that the copyists of all complete and independent manuscripts were 
equally careless in numbering the chapters. This supposition is 
corroborated by the fact that the contents of the work do not show 
that any chapter is missing. 

The last verse of the first chapter states the reason why the book is 
named Manasara, and explains the importance and authority of the 
work. It is called Manasdra after a sage of that name. And as an 
authoritative work on art and complete in all respects, it has been 
accepted, it is stated, by the best among the leading artists. 


CHAPTER II 
Tue System or MrasurEmMENT (Ménopakarana-vidhana) 


The first part of this chapter gives a mythical genealogy of the 
artists. From the four faces of Brahma, the Creator of the Universe, 
originated, in order, the heavenly architect Visvakarman, Maya, 
Tvashtar, and Manu. Their four sons are called respectively Sthapati, 


1 This summary has developed out of a Dissertation, which was accepted by the 
University of Leiden for the Ph. D. degree. 


97 g 


ie Gaeias HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


Sitragrahin, Vardhaki, and Takshaka. These four evidently represent 
the progenitors of the four classes of terrestrial artists. 

The Sthapati is highest in rank; he is the master-builder. The 
Sitragrahin is the guru of Vardhaki and Takshaka; while the Var- 
dhaki is instructor of the Takshaka. 

The Sthapati must be well-versed in all sciences (Sastras). He must 
know the Vedas. He must have the qualifications of a supreme director 
(acharya). 

The Sitragrahin also should know the Vedas and the Sdstras. He 
must be an expert draftsman (rekhdjna). 

The Vardhaki too should have a general knowledge of the Vedas. 
But the object of his special study is painting (chitra-karman). 

The Taksbaka must be an expert in his own work ; i.e. carpentry. 

The second part of this chapter deals with the system of measure- 


ment : 
The paramanu or atom is the smallest unit of measurement. 


8 paramanus = 1 rathadhili (lit. car-dust). 

8 rathadhilis = 1 bdldgra (lit. hair’s end). 

8 balagras = 1 liksha (lit. a nit). 

8 likshas = 1 pukda (lit. a louse). 

8 yikas = 1 yava (lit. a barley corn). 

8 yavas = 1 angula (lit. finger’s breadth). 


Three kinds of azgulas are distinguished, the largest of which is 
made of 8 yavas, the intermediate one of 7 yavas, and the smallest 
one of 6 yavas. 


12 angulas = 1 oitasti (span). 
me \ = x Hishbu-hasta (small cubit). 
25 angulas = 1 prajapatya-hasta. 
26 48 =: 1 dhanurmushti-hasta. 
27 s = 1 dhanuragraha-hasta. 

¢ 4. hastas = 1 dhanus (bow) or danda (rod). 
8 dandas = 1 rajju (string). 


Directions are given with regard to the use of the four different 
kinds of cubits (hasta) enumerated above. Conveyances (ydna) and 
couches (fayana) are said to measured in the cubit of 24 angulas, vimana 
in the cubit of 25 azgulas, buildings (vdstu) in general in the cubit of 26 
angulas, and villages, etc., in the cubit of 27 azigulas. The cubit of 24 
angulas may, however, also be used in measuring all these objects. 


98 


INDIA AND ABROAD MANASARA 


In the concluding portion of this chapter directions are given for 
the preparation of the yard-stick (hasta), the rod (danda), and the 
measuring-string (rajju). The former two objects should be made of the 
wood of certain trees, which are enumerated. In the same manner 
certain fibres are to be used as materials for the rope. The presiding 
deity of the yard-stick and the rod is Vishnu, and that of the measur- 
ing-rope Vasuki, the king of serpents. 


CHAPTERS III, IV, V 


THE CLAssiFICATION or VAstu (Vashtu-prakarana) 
EXAMINATION OF Soin (Bhi-parikshd)—SELECTION OF SITE 
(Bhimi-sa mgraha) 


The first part of the third chapter defines odstu (dwelling or 
habitation) and divides it into four classes. The place where men 
and gods reside is called vastu. This includes the ground (dhara), the 
building (harmya), the conveyance (ydna), and the couch (paryanka). 
Of these, the ground is the principal one, for nothing can be built 
without the ground as a support. The building (harmya) includes 
prasada, mandapa, sabha, sala, prapa and ranga. The conveyance 
(yana) includes syandana, Sibika and ratha. The couch (faryanka) 
includes pafjara, mafchali, maiicha, kakashta, phalakasana and bala- 
paryanka. 

The second part of the third chapter, as well as the fourth and fifth 
chapters, deal with the same subject, namely, the site on which a 
village, town, fort, palace, temple, or house, is to be built. The soil is 
examined with regard to its contour, colour, odour, features (ripa), 
taste, and touch. The level of the ground, as well as the characteristic 
vegetation of the site, are also minutely examined. 

If a plot of land is found to be satisfactory on all or most of these 
points, it should be selected for a village, town, fort, or house, as 
the case may be. But even after this selection it would be wise to test 
the ground in some other ways. A square hole of one cubit deep 
should be dug on the selected site and be filled with water. After 
twenty-four hours the chief architect should mark the condition of the 
water in the hole. If all the water be dried up by this time, the earth 
must be very bad. But if, on the other hand, there remains some water 
in the hole, the selected plot of land would be fit for any building 


purposes. 


99 


SILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE In 


Another final test is this : a similar hole is dug on the plot and filled 
up with the earth taken out of it. If this earth fills up the hole exactly, 
the land is fair ; if this earth be not quite enough to fill up the hole 
the ground must be very bad, but if this earth overfills the hole, the 
soil must be very good for any building purposes. The import of both 
tests seems to be that in the former case porous soil is avoided, while 
in the latter case loose soil is said to be unfit for the construction of a 
building. 

After this final selection the ground should be ploughed over. The 
concluding part of the fifth chapter gives a minute description of the 
oxen and the plough to be used in ploughing the selected site. 


CHAPTER VI 


Tue Gnomon (Sanku-sthapaua-vidhana) 


The object of this chapter is to lay down rules on the principles of 
dialling and for ascertaining the cardinal points by means of a gnomon. 

The gnomon is made of the wood of certain trees. It may be 24, 18, 
or 12 azgulas in length, and the width at the base should be respectively 
6, 5, and 4 azigulas. It tapers from the bottom towards the top. 

For the purpose of ascertaining the cardinal points, a gnomon of 
12, 18, or 24 angulas is erected from the centre of a watered place 
(salila-sthala) and a circle is described with the bottom of the gnomon 
as its centre and with a radius twice its length. Two points are marked 
where the shadow (of the gnomon) after and before noon meets the 
circumference of the circle. The line joining these two points is the 
east-west line. From each of these east and west points a circle is 
drawn with their distance as radius. The two intersecting points, 
which are called the head and tail of the fish (timi), are the north and 
the south points. The intermediate regions are found in the same 
way, through the fish formed between the points of the determined 
quarters. 

As regards the principles of dialling, each of the twelve months 
is divided into three parts of ten days each and the increase and 


decrease of shadow (avachchhdya)! are calculated for these several 
parts of the different months. : 

1 Cf. Vitruvius, Book IX, Chap. VIII, ‘. . . the principles of dialling and 
te Guity and decrease of the days in the different months’ (translated 
y Gwilt). 


100 


INDIA AND ABROAD Rea 


Why the subject of the present chapter is important for architecture 
is evident from the rules regarding the orientation of buildings. Here 
it is said that a building should preferably face the east or the north- 
east, but that it should never be made to face the south-east, as this 
is considered inauspicious. 

The chapter closes with a passing reference to the khata-Sanku, which 
appears to denote wooden stakes posted in different parts of the 
foundations made for constructing buildings thereon. 


CHAPTER VII 
THE SITE-PLAN (Pada-vinydsa) 


When a site is selected for constructing a village, town, or building 
thereon the ground is divided into different numbers of squares. 
Thirty-two kinds of such schemes are distinguished by as many different 
designations, according to the number of squares into which the 
whole area is partitioned out. The whole scheme has been arranged 
in such a manner that in each case the number of partitions represent 
the square of the serial number. The eighth plot, for instance, which 
is called chandita, comprises a division into sixty-four squares, while 
by the ninth plot, which bears the technical name of paramasayika, 
the ground is divided into eighty-one squares. 

Each of these squares is assigned to its presiding deity. Some deities, 
however, are lords of more than one square. The lord of the central 
square is always Brahma. Charagi, Vidarika, Piitana, and Rakshasi 
are the presiding deities of the four corners. A detailed description of 
all the squares of the eighth and the ninth plans is given in the text. 
Then the forty-four deities, who are enumerated in connexion with 
the paramasayika scheme, are described in the form of as many dhydnas. 
The portion is of some iconographical interest. 

Finally, the presiding deity of the site (vdstu-purusha), who is described 
as hump-backed and of crooked shape, is said to occupy the habitated 
area (vdstu) in such a manner that his limbs cover the several squares 
or groups of squares, which, as set forth in the former part of the 
chapter, are assigned to and named after various deities. As he is 
supposed to lie down with his face turned downwards, his head being 
in the central square on the east side (assigned to Sirya), his right and 
left hands must be in the partitions of Agni (S.E.) and Isana (N. E.) 
respectively, and his right and left feet on those of Nairrita (S. W.) 

101 


SILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE ry 


and Vayu (N. W.) respectively. The middle part of his body occu- 
pies the central portion of the plot, which, as we saw, is assigned to 
Brahma. 


CHAPTER VIII 
Tue Orrerincs (Bulikarma-vidhana) 


Different kinds of offerings (bali) are described for the various deitie 
enumerated in the preceding chapter, who are supposed to preside 
over the different partitions of the paramasayika or mandika (site, 
plan). These offerings consist of milk in its various forms, butter, rice 
and sesame, parched grain (/aja), honey and sweetmeat (modaka, 
offered to Sugriva), incense and lamps, flowers and fruits. Blood is 
offered to Asura, dried meat to Mriga, dried fish to Roga (disease)- 
and sea-fish to Bhringaraja. The four demonesses, namely, Rakshasis 
Piitana, Vidart, and Charagi, also receive their share, the first-men- 
tioned evil spirit in the shape of meat of goats mixed with blood. 

In the bringing of these offerings the master-builder (Sthapati) takes 
a leading part. 


CHAPTER IX 
Tue Vittace (Grémalakshana-vidhana) 


According to the Mdanasdra, there is not much difference between a 
village, a town, and a fort. All are fortified places intended for the 
residence of people. A town is the extension of a village. A fort is in 
many cases nothing more than a fortified town, with this difference, 
that a fort is principally meant for purposes of defence, while a village 
or a town is mainly intended for habitation. 

A detailed description of the plan of villages, towns, and forts, and 
the arrangement of the various buildings which they contain is given 
in the text. 

Villages are divided according to their shapes into eight classes, 
called dandaké, sarvato-bhadra, nandyavarta, padmaka, svastika, prastara, 
karmuka, and chatur-mukha. 

Each village is surrounded by a wall made of brick or stone; beyond 
this wall there is a ditch broad and deep enough to cause serious 
obstruction in the event of an attack on the village. There are generally 
four main gates at the middle of the four sides, and as many at the 


102 


ee eee 


s& 


PLATE XXVIII(a) 


FRONT ELEVATION: 


BATHING GHAT FOR TANKS 
PAL OR SEN PERIOD, 


NOTE 


The design for this Ghat Is pased 
On the extant remains ot Tank, 
Ghats found in the Districts of 
ND 
poe Dacca ang Bogra o Pal ana Sen 
LEVEL. periods 


SECTION 


10 5 10 20 
Scale of eS Ss SS S| Feet 


BATHING GHAT FOR TANKS Page 102 


PLATE XXVII1(b) 


‘BATHING GHAT FOR RIVER 


‘PAL OR ‘SEN PERIOD 


FEET 


15° 20 


40 


oO 


1 


A| SCALE OF 


FEET-FOR DETAI 


6 


2 
This design is based on the extant remains of 


old River Ghats found in Bengal. 


1 
NOTE. 


Mi) SCALE OF 


SVAN 


LW 


S 


‘DETAIL ‘OF THE .FACADE, 


SECTION. 


ae + 
hhh 


We 


\' 


BATHING GHAT FOR, RIVER 


INDIA AND ABROAD MANASARA 


four corners. Inside the wall there is a large street running all round 
the village. Besides, there are two other large streets, each of which 
connects two opposite main gates. They intersect each other at the 
centre of the village, where a temple or a hall is generally built for 
the meeting of the villagers. The village is thus divided into four main 
blocks, each of which is again subdivided into many blocks by streets 
which are always straight and run from one end to the other of a main 
block. The two main streets crossing at the centre have houses and 
footpaths on one side of the street. The ground-floor of these houses 
on the main streets consists of shops. The street, which runs round the 
village, has also houses and footpaths only on one side. These houses 
are mainly public buildings, such as schools, libraries, guest-houses, 
etc. All other streets generally have residential buildings on both sides. 
The houses, high or low, are always uniform in make. Drains ( jaladvara, 
lit. water-passage) follow the slope of the ground. Tanks and ponds 
are dug in all the inhabited parts, and located where they can con- 
veniently be reached by a large number of inhabitants. The temples 
of public worship, as well as the public commons, gardens, and parks 
are similarly located. People of the same caste or profession are gene- 
rally housed in the same quarter. 

The partition of the quarters among the various sects cannot be 
said to be quite impartial. The best quarters are generally reserved 
for the Brahmans and the architects. Such partiality to the artists is 
not met elsewhere in Sanskrit literature. The quarters of the Bud- 
dhists and the Jains are described in a few lines. The habitations of the 
Chandalas, as well as the places for cremation, are located outside the 
village wall, in the north-west in particular. The temples of fearful 
deities, such as Chamunda, are also placed outside the wall, 


CHAPTER X 
Towns AND Forts (Nagara-vidhana) 


As stated above, a town is a large village. According to the M ana- 
sdra, it appears that the dimensions of the smallest town-unit are 
100X200 dandas ; the largest town-unit is 7,200 X 14,400 dandas. A 
town may be situated from east to west or from north to south accord- 
ing to the position it occupies. There should be one to twelve large 
streets in a town. It should be built near a river or a mountain, and 
should have facilities for tirade and commerce with the foreigners 


103 


ReeRoeRAs HINDU ARCHITECTURE ry 


(dvipantara-vartin). Like a village, it should have walls, ditches and 
gates, drains, parks, commons, shops, exchanges, temples, fuest- 
houses, colleges, etc. For purposes of military defence, the towns are 
generally well fortified. 

Towns are divided into eight classes : r@jadhdni-nagara, kevala-nagara, 
pura, nagari, kheta, kharvata, kubjaka, and patiana. The distinction be- 
tween them is slight, the general description given above being applic- 
able to all. But it may be noted that the city called pattana is a big 
commercial port. It is situated on the banks of the sea Or a river, and 
is always engaged in exchange and commerce with foreigners who 
deal specially in jewels, silk clothes, perfumes, etc., imported from 
other countries (dvipdntara). 

Forts are first divided into eight classes, called s¢bira, vahini-mukha, 
sthaniya, dronaka, sarnviddha or vardhaka, kolaka, nigama, and skandhivara, 
There is a further division of these forts according to their Position. 
They are known as mountain fort (girt-durga), forest fort (vana-durga), 
water fort (jala-durga), chariot fort (ratha-durga), divine fort (deva- 
durga), marsh fort (fanka-durga), and mixed fort (misra-durga). 

The mountain fort is subdivided into three classes, according 'as it is 
built on the top of the mountain, in the valley, or on the mountain 
slope. 

All these forts are surrounded with strong walls and ditches. The 
wall is made of brick, stone, and similar materials. It is at least 12 
cubits in height and its thickness at the base is at least 6 cubits. It is 
provided with watch-towers. 


CHAPTER XI 


Tue. Dimensions or Buinpincs oF Various STOREYS 
(Bhimilamba-vidhana) 

The name of this chapter is Bhimilamba, which literally means 
the height of the storey. The Kamikdgama (patala 50, verse 1) defines 
this name, Bhimilamba, thus: ‘ Chatur amsadi-samsthanam  bhiimi- 
lambam iti smritam.’? The chapters on the subject, in both the works, 
Manaséra and Kamikdgama, deal with the measurement of length, 
breadth, and height of buildings of one to twelve storeys. 

The various shapes of buildings are mentioned in the opening lines 
of the chapter. They may be square, rectangular, round, octagonal, 
or oval. Buildings of all kinds, such as the vimana or temple, the 
harmya or palace, the Sopura or gate-house, the sala or storeyed 


104 


INDIA AND ABROAD Re ery en 


mansion, the mandapa or pavilion, and the vesman (residential houses 
generally) should have one of these five shapes. 

Buildings are again divided into four classes—jati, chhanda, vikalpa 
or samkalpa, and dbhasa—which are frequently referred to in the 
subsequent chapters. These four classes seem to have different 
characteristics in different cases. 

The proportion between height and width is expressed by five 
technical names, Sdntika, paushtika, parshnika (sometimes called jayada), 
adbhuta, and sarvakamika. When the height of a building or idol is 
equal to its width, it is called santika ; the paushtika height is 1} times 
the width; the parshnika or jayada height is 14 of the width; the adbhuta 
height is twice the width; and the sarvakdmika height is 13 of the width. 
This proportion of height and width is not, however, strictly followed 
all through. There is a slight variation in some cases. But the propor- 
tions given above are the most common. The measurement of 
length, breadth, and height is invariably divided into three types : 
large, intermediate, and small. The $antika and the paushtika heights 
are prescribed for the large type of measurement, the pdarshnika 
or jayada for the intermediate type, and the adbhuia and the sarva- 
kamika for the small type. 

Five series of length and five series of breadth are prescribed here 
for each of the several classes of buildings of one to twelve storeys. 
But in some subsequent chapters as many as nine alternatives of 
length and breadth are prescribed for one and the same object. 

The five series of breadth in the small type of one-storeyed build- 
ings are 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 units, and the five series of length are 3, 5, 
7, 9 and 11 units. In the intermediate type the five series of breadth 
are 5, 7, 9, 11 and 1g units, and the five series of length 6, 8, 10 
12 and 14 units. In the large type, the five series of breadth are 
6, 8, 10, 12 and 14 units, and the five lengths are 7, 9, 11, 13 and 
15 units. 

All the classes of buildings of one to twelve storeys are in this way 
measured separately. The dimensions of the twelve-storeyed building 
in its three types are given briefly.! In the small type they are 35, 


1The description of these dimensions is much clearer in the Kamikagama 
(patala Bole ecidite to this work, the width of a twelve-storeyed building is 
70 cubits and the height 100 cubits. It expressly states (sloka 33) that it is 
never desirable that buildings should be larger than 77 cubits in height and 
70 cubits in width. 


105 


§ILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


37, 39, 41, 43 units, in the intermediate type 36, 38, 40, 4a, 4A 
units, and in the large type 37, 39, 41, 43, 45 units. These are the 
fifteen kinds of vipula, and the height should be as before. 

These are the measurements in the jai class of buildings. Three- 
fourths, half, and one-fourth of these are prescribed for the chhanda, 
the vikalpa, and the dbhdsa classes respectively. 

The concluding part of this chapter prescribes the number of storeys 
allowed in edifices according to the social status of their occupants. In 
the first instance reference is made to the various classes of kings,! of 
whom the one highest in rank, namely, the chakravartin or universal 
monarch, is said to inhabit a palace of five to twelve storeys. The 
residence of the heir-apparent (yuvardja), as well as those belonging 
to the chief feudatories (sdmanta-pramukha), should have one to three 
storeys. 


CHAPTER XII 
Tue Founpation (Garbhavinydsa-vidhana) 


The foundation is classified under three heads, namely, for build- 
ings, for villages, etc., and for tanks, etc. ‘The last-named foundation 
is meant for a cistern, well or tank (vdpi-kiipa-tataka), etc. 

The depth of the excavation (garbha-bhajana) in case of a village, a 
town, or a fort (grdéma, nagara, pura, pattana, kharvata, koshtha, kola, etc.) 
is stated to be of five kinds, and varies in accordance with the size 
of the construction. Similarly, for a building or a well suitable depth 
of the excavation is prescribed. 

The foundation of buildings is further divided into two classes 
as it may belong to temples or to human dwellings. Of*temples, those 
of Vishnu and Brahma are dealt with, and the others are said to 
be like these. 

For human dwellings there are four classes of foundations accord- 
ing to the caste of the occupier, Brahman, Kshatriya, Vaisya, or 
Sidra. In the laying of a foundation, ritualistic prescriptions play 
a prominent part, the actual process apparently being the same in 
all cases. 


1Cf below, Chapter XLI. In the present passage only six out of the nine 
gee ere mentioned, the mandaleSa, patiadhara and parshnika having been 
omitted, 


106 


INDIA AND ABROAD MANASARA 


The depth of the excavation is equal to the height of the basement. 
The four corners and sides, built of brick or stone, are equal. 

The depth of the excavation (lit. foundation-cave) should be as 
high as the basement of the building; the four sides (Jit. corners 
or walls), made of brick or stone, should be equal; from its bottom 
should be removed water (if there comes out any), and all (kinds 
of) earth should be deposited therein. The floor of the excavation 
should be consolidated with seven kinds of earth, namely, from 
rivers and mountains, from ant-hills, crab-holes, sea-shores, from 
tops of trees (hills), and from near a cow-shed (it. from the foreparts 
of cows’ hoofs). Upon this (earth deposit) should be (further) 
deposited the root of the (white) lotus at the central part (of the ex- 
cavation), to the east the root of the blue lotus, to the south the root 
of the water-lily, to the west saugandhi (grass), and to the north the 
kakali (gunja) plant. Upon this should be placed, in order, the 
following eight sorts of corn: sali (corn) should be placed to the 
north-east and vrihi (grains) to the east, kodrava (Paspalum scorbicu- 
latum) to the south-east, kangu (panic seed) to the south, mudga 
(phaseolus mungo) to the south-west, mdsha (bean, phaseolus raditus) to 
the west, kulattha (dolichos uniflorous) to the north-west and tila (sesamum 
indicum) to the north. Upon this (finally depositing the other usual 
materials, e.g. concrete) the foundation should be raised up to the 
(upper) surface of the excavation. 

As regard the measurement and the shape, it (the foundation) 
should be in conformity with buildings of one to twelve storeys. 
The twelve varieties of dimensions (of breadth and length) should 
begin respectively with three and four parts (mdiras, i.e. angulas) 
and end at twenty-five and twenty-six, the increment being by two. 
The depth of the excavation should be equal to its breadth and less 
by one-eighth or one-fifth, or similarly less by one-fourth. All these 
(measures) are stated to be (taken) in rods (of four cubits). The 
breadth of the excavation should be equal to the width of the 
(main) pillar of the building, or it may be made less by one-eighth, 
or be three-fourths of the breadth. The depth (of the excavation) 
should be made as aforesaid. The width of all the (four) walls 
should be one, two, or three parts out of the three parts into which 
the depth is divided. The depth of the excavation being divided 
into four parts one part is given to its base, two parts to its pillar 
and one part to the entablature. It (the excavation) should be 

107 


' §ILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


shaped like a three-fold square pavilion at its entrance into the 
watery part (i.e. the bottom). 

The concluding lines of this chapter deal with the measurement 
of bricks, with which buildings of one to twelve storeys are preferably 
built, and also with the ceremonies in connexion with the laying 
of the foundation-stone (lz. first brick, prathameshtaka). The breadth 
of a brick may be from 7 to 29 or go aagulas. The length is greater 
than the breadth by 4, 4, 3, or is twice the breadth. The thickness 
should be half of the breadth. 


CHAPTER XIII 
Tue PepestaL (Upapitha-vidhana) 


The opening lines of the chapter describe the height of the pedestal 
as compared with the base. This height is said to be of nine kinds, 
which are worked out by nine proportions. Five of them are those 
expressed by the technical terms sdntika, paushtika, jayada, adbhuta and 
sarvakamika (4, +, 4, 4, and 7). Ram Raz, on the authority of a Tamil 
manuscript, says that the height of the pedestal is to be reckoned from 
one-quarter to six times of the height of the base. 

The next topic of this chapter refers to the measurement of the 
projections (nirgama) of pedestals. ‘The height of the pedestal is 
divided into 3, 4, 5,6, 7, 8, 9, 10, II, 12, 13, 14, or 15 equal parts; 
of these 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, or 8 are given to the projection. The nine 
kinds of projection are 1, 14, 14, 13, 2, 24, 24, 23, and 3 hastas. The 
projections may be 1, 1}, 2, 23, 3, 3%) 45 5, 6, 7, 8, or g dandas. 

After this, the pedestals are divided into three classes known as vedi- 
bhadra, prati-bhadra, and majficha-bhadra. Each of these is subdivided 
into four types. The measures of the mouldings of each of these 
twelve kinds of pedestals are given in detail. 

The remaining portion of the chapter contains the names and 
measurement of the various mouldings which are to be employed in 
each of the twelve kinds of pedestal. 


CHAPTER XIV 
THE Base (Adhishthana-vidhana) 


The height of the bases is of twelve kinds, beginning at 30 azigulas 
and ending at 4 hastas, the increment being by 6 angulas. These 


108 


INDIA AND ABROAD MANASARA 


twelve heights are used respectively in twelve different storeys, one 
above the other. The heights of the bases are said to be 4 hastas 
in the houses of the Brahmans, 3 hastas in those of the Kshatriyas 
(kings), 23 Aastas in the houses of princes, 2 hastas in those of the 
Vaisyas, and 1 hasta in the houses of the Siidras. 

Some sixty-four bases are described under nineteen different types 
called pdda-bandha, uraga-bandha, fratikrama, kumuda-bandha, padma- 
kesara, pushpa-pushkala, Sri-bandha, mafcha-bandha, Sreni-bandha, padma- 
bandha, kumbha-bandha (or kalaga-bandha), vapra-bandha, vajra-bandha, 
Sri-bhoga, ratna-bandha, patta-bandha, kukshi-bandha, kampa-bandha, and 
Srikanta. Of cach of the bases the mouldings and ornaments are 
described in detail. 

CHAPTER XV 


Tue Piivar (Stambha-lakshana-vidhana) 


The opening lines divide the subject-matter into five heads, namely, 
the measurement of pillars, their shapes, their ornaments and mould- 
ings, the collection of wood for the purpose of making pillars, which 
may, however, be made of stone, and the ceremonial and process 
of erecting pillars. 

The height of a pillar is measured from above the base to below 
the uttara, or above the pedestal from he janman to the uttara. The 
height of a pillar, in other words, is measured from the plinth up 
to the lowest member of the entablature, so as to include the capital. 
In an important passage in the Kasyapa, quoted by Ram Raz, it 
is stated that the measurement may also be taken from the cimbia 
of the shaft, exclusive of the base. 

The height of a pillar is twice, one-and-a-half times, or one-and- 
a-quarter times that of its base, or the height of the pillar begins at 
2k hastas and ends at 8 hastas, the increment being by 6 avigulas or 
1 hasta. But according to Kasyapa, the height of the pillar may be three 
times of the base ; or six or eight times that of the pedestal. The width 
(diameter) of a pillar may be 4, +, $, 3 or zy ofits height, or $, ¢ or 
$ of the height if it be a pilaster (kudya-stambha). The width of the 
pilaster, according to the Manasdra, is 3, 4, 5, or 6 mdtras (angulas), 
and twice, thrice, or four times of these should be the width of the 
kampa. The height of a pillar being divided into 12, 11, 10, 9 or 
8 parts, the one of these parts may be the breadth of the pillar, and 
at the top it is diminished by one-fourth. 


109 


§ILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE Iv 


The column admits of different shapes. A square pillar is called 
brahma-kanta. An octagonal one is called vishnu-kanta. A sixteen-sided 
or circular one is known as rudra-kanta. A pentagonal one is called 
Siva-kanta, and the hexagonal one skanda-kanta. These shapes are 
stated to be uniform from bottom to top. But the base may be 


quadrangular. 
With respect to dimensions and ornaments the five kinds of columns 


—brahma-kanta, vishnu-kanta, rudra-kanta, Siva-kania, and skanda-kanta— 
are called chitra-karna, padma-kanta, chitra-skambha, palikd-stambha, and 
kumbha-stambha. A sixth one, kostha-stambha, in the latter division, is 
stated to be two-sided, and is the same as the kudya-stambha or pilaster. 

It should be noticed that the former set of five names refers to the 
shapes of the shafts, whilst the latter set of five names is based on the 
shapes of the capitals, but in the detailed description both the capital 
and shaft are included. 

Some special kinds of pillars are also described, such as chitra- 
karna, padma-kanta, chitra-skambha, vira-kantha, palika-stambha, kumbha- 
stambha and koshtha-stambha. Then follow the description and measure- 
ment of the mouldings of the pillars. 

Columns, when in rows, must be in a straight line. ‘'The inter- 
columnation may be two, three, four or five diameters ; it is measured 
in three ways, first, from the inner extremity of the base of one pillar 
to that of another ; second, from the centre of the two pillars; and 
third from the outer extremities of the pillars including the two bases.’ 
There seems to be no fixed inter-columnation. This has been left 
to the discretion of architects who are, however, required to be parti- 
cularly careful with regard to beauty and utility. 

Minor pillars should conform to the main pillar. A main pillar 
with one minor pillar (upapada) is called eka-kdnta, with two minor 
pillars dvi-kanta, and with three minor pillars tri-kdnta. A main pillar 
with four minor pillars is called brahma-kanta, with five siva-kanta, 
with six skanda-kanta, and with eight minor pillars it is called vishnu- 
kanta. 

There is a long description of the collection of wood for purposes of 
pillars. ‘The details seem to indicate that at the time when the Mana- 
sdra was composed, wood was frequently used for making columns; 
stone pillars are also mentioned, but pillars made of brick alone are 
not particularly dealt with. It is, however, stated that stone, brick 
and wood were used for making different parts of a column. The 


TTO 


INDIA AND ABROAD MANASARA 


square Gdhara or base of a stone pillar, it is stated, should be made 
of stone, and that of the wooden pillar of wood. But at the end 
of the next chapter, it is added that all the parts of a column should 
be made of stone (Si/@), wood (daru) or brick (tshtaka). In the middle 
of the same chapter the use of these three materials is elaborately 
discussed. The pillars, etc., are called suddha (pure) when made 
of one material, misra (mixed) when made of two materials, and 
samkirna (amalgamated) when made of all the three (or more) 
materials. 

The concluding part of this chapter deals with ceremonies in con- 
nexion with erecting columns. They are essentially ritualistic. It is 
directed that the column should be posted (vefayet) at the side of a 
mandapa or pavilion. 


CHAPTER XVI 
Tue ENTABLATURE (Prastara-vidhana) 


The height of the entablature (frastara), as compared with that of 
the base (adhishthana), is of six kinds. The height of the former may be 
equal to that of the latter, or less by 4, or greater by 4, 4 or 3; or it 
may be twice; or, in cubit (hasta) measurement these six kinds of 
height of the entablature begin at 7 cubits and end at 44 cubits, 
the decrement being by 4 cubit. These six kinds of entablatures are 
respectively used in the houses of the gods, the Brahmans, the kings 
(or Kshatriyas), the crown-princes (yuvardjas), the Vaigyas, and the 
Siidras. 

The height of the entablature is said to be 4 or # of, or equal to, 
that of the pillar (pada), or greater by 4, 4 or #. Yet another set of six 
heights is described. ‘The height of the pillar being divided into eight 
parts, seven, six, five, four, three or two parts may be assigned to 
that of the entablature. 

The greater portion of the chapter is devoted to an enumeration 
of the various mouldings and the measurement of each of the eight 
different kinds of entablature. 

In this chapter the roofing (prachchhadana) of buildings is described. 
It is stated that a brick-built building may be furnished with a wooden 
roof, and that the roofs of stone buildings should also be built of 
stone. 


TTI 


SILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE In 


CHAPTER XVII 
Woop Jotnery (Sandhikarma-vidhdna) 


The definition of the name (sandhikarman) of the chapter is given 
in the opening lines. The joining of pieces of wood for buildings is 
called sandhi-karman. Several kinds of wood-joining are described in 
detail. Pieces of wood are said to be joined in such a way as to 
make the nandydvarta, sdastika, sarvato-bhadra and such other shapes. 
Some kinds of wood are strictly forbidden to be joined with some 
others. Fresh timber, it is stated, should under no circumstances be 
joined with seasoned wood. 

It may be noted that wood was very largely used in constructing 
houses of various kinds ; some parts of pillars too were made of wood, 
as has already been pointed out. Doors were mostly made of wood. 
The same was the case with couches, cars, chairs, etc. 


CHAPTER XVIII 


Tue GENERAL Description oF Burtpines (Vimdna-vidhdna) 


The contents of the chapter are divided into the following headings: 
the classification of the vimanas of one to twelve storeys; the three 
styles of architecture; the characteristic features of the stipika or 
pinnacle, the stipi-kila or pinnacle staff, the /upd or :loping roof, and 
the mukhabhadra or front portico; and the ceremonies of fixing the 
pinnacle staff. 

The description begins with the making of the foundation; but 
this subject has already been dealt with in Chapter XII. 

- The classification of vimdnas of one to twelve storeys is elaborately 
described here, their absolute dimensions having already been given in 
Chapter XI, called Bhimilamba-vidhana. Each of the twelve classes 
is subdivided into three types, according to their size—large, inter- 
mediate, and small. Whilst the width of the small type of one- 
storeyed building is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 parts, it should be 5, 6, or 7 
parts in the intermediate type, and 6, 7, or 8 parts in the large type. 
These ‘parts’ appear to be the partitions of the facade bordered 
by two pilasters (pada). 

The three styles of architecture are called ndgara, dravida, and vesara, 
which are apparently geographical names. The distinguishing feature 
seems to be the general shape of the sikhara or spherical roof. 


T1i2 


AND AB 
INDIA AN. ROAD re 


In the third place, the measurement and mouldings of the pin- 
nacle (stupi or stipikd) are given in detail, The height of the stapi 
js one cubit (hasta) in the houses of the Siidras, two cubits in a i 
of the Vaisyas, two cubits and a half in the houses of the cro Be 
princes ( yuvardaja), three cubits in the houses of the kings (Kshatri a) ; 
three cubits and a half in the houses of the Brahmans and four Bie 
in the houses of the gods, that is, in temples. re 

Building materials are then discussed. Four kinds of materials 
are distinctly mentioned : stone, brick, wood, and iron (lauha) 

Buildings are made of one, two, three, or all four of these mater 
but preference is given to the use of one material alone. With re 
gard to materials, buildings are divided into three classes, namely 
Suddha (pure), made of one material alone, misra (mixed) made of 
two materials, and samkirna (amalgamated), made of three or more 
materials. 

The term stipi-kila literally means the nail or pin of the stipi. Its 
form is described clearly. It is quadrangular at the base, octagonal 
at the middle, circular at the top, and tapering gradually from bottom 
to top. The width at the top is one angula. 

Then two more architectural members are described, namely, the 
lupa and the mukha-bhadra. The former is explained by Ram Raz! as 
‘a sloping and a projecting member of the entablature, represent- 
ing a continued pent roof. It is made below the cupola (sikhara), 
and its ends are placed as if it were suspended from the archi- 
trave, and reaching the stalk of the lotus below.’ 

The mukha-bhadra, or front tabernacle or porch according to the 
same author,” indicates an ornamental niche, which occupies a central 
position in the fagade of the building. 

The chapter concludes with a description of the ceremonies in 


connexion with fixing the stipi-kila. 


CHAPTER XIX 
Tue ONE-STOREYED Burtpincs (Ekhabhimt-vidhana)® 


The chapter opens with various classifications of buildings. They 
are first divided into four classes called jati, chhanda, vikalpa, and 
abhasa. Here they are considered with regard to their measurement. 

1Ram Raz, Essay, p. 52, footnote 2. 2 Ibid, p. 51, f. 
SCR. ibid, pp. 49-53. Plate XXI. 
113 h 


§ILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE 1 N 


The jai class is said to be measured in the firva-hasta, the first 
kind of cubit, i.e. the cubit of 24. avigulas. The chhanda is apparently 
measured in the cubit of 25 azgulas, the vikalpa in the cubit of 
26 angulas and the abhdsa in the cubit of 27 angulas (?), 

A further classification is into sthdnaka, dsana and Sayana, which are 
also called, respectively, sarichita, asamchtta, and apasamchita. This classi- 
fication also refers to measurement. In the sthdnaka class the measure- - 
ment of the height is considered, in the dsana the breadth is taken into 
consideration, and in the fayana the width is measured. It should be 
noted that these three classes, namely, sthdnaka, dsana, and Sayana, have 
a further signification with regard to the object of worship. In the 
sthanaka buildings the idol is in an erect posture, in the dsana build- 
ings in a sitting posture, and in the Sayana buildings in a recumbent 
posture. 

A third classification refers to the shape. Buildings are classed as 
masculine (purusha) when they are equiangular or circular, and as 
feminine when they are rectangular. Male deities are installed in 
masculine temples, and female deities in feminine temples. It is added, 
however, that the images of the latter may be placed in masculine 
temples too. eet 

After this introduction comes the description of one-storeyed build- 
ings. The absolute measurement is referred to in the chapter called 
Bhimi-lamba (dimensions of storeys). The comparative measurement 
and plan are described here at great length. The whole height of 
the building is divided into a certain number of equal parts which 
are distributed in a happy proportion amongst the different members, 
namely, the base, the pillar, the entablature, the neck, the dome, and 
the pinnacle. Similarly, the length of the entire temple is divided into 
a certain number of equal parts which are also distributed amongst 
various rooms and halls, namely, the garbha-griha or shrine, the antarala 
or anteroom, and the mandapa or pavilion. These component parts of 
the building are described in detail in subsequent chapters, as also the 
gate-houses (gopura), courts (prakdra) and such other architectural 
members as doors, windows, arches, and so forth. In the present 
chapter a detailed account is given of the water-channel (ndla), 
which is meant to be an outlet for the water. 

The eight kinds of one-storeyed buildings are known as jayantika, 
bhoga, Srivisala, svasti-bandhana, Srikara, hasti-prishtha, skandhatara, and 
keSara. 


114 


INDIA AND ABROAD MANASARA 


The concluding portions of this chapter, as well as of the next eleven 
chapters, are devoted to an enumeration of the various deities with 
whose images the doors and walls of buildings should be decorated. 

The Buddhist and Jain temples, dealt with in only two lines, are 
directed to be similarly built, with the difference that in these temples 


the images of the Buddhist and Jain gods should be installed instead 
of the images of the Brahmans. 


CHAPTERS XX—XXX 
Buitpincs or Two to TwELvE STOREYS 


The contents of these eleven chapters of the Manasara may be 
conveniently summarized together. They deal respectively with 
two-storeyed (dot-tala), three-storeyed (tri-tala), four-storeyed (chatus- 
tala), five-storeyed (pafcha-tala), six-storeyed (shaf-tala), seven-storeyed 
(sapta-tala), eight-storeyed (ashta-tala), nine-storeyed (nava-tala), ten- 
storeyed (dafa-tala), eleven-storeyed (ekadaSa-tala), and twelve-storeyed 
(dvadasa-tala) buildings. In each of these chapters we find a classifica- 
tion of the peculiar kind of edifice under discussion followed by an 
account of certain details, in particular the location of the divine 
images with which the walls are decorated. Thus the buildings of two 
storeys are divided into eight classes which are called srtkara, vijaya, 
stddha, paushtika, kantaka, adbhuta (also prabhitaka), soastika, and push- 
kala. Those of three storeys are likewise divided into eight classes, 
called Srikanta, dsana, sukhalaya, keSara, kamalanga, brahma-kanta, meru- 
kanta, and kailasa. The same eight-fold division is found in connexion 
with the four-storeyed buildings; here the names are vishnu-kanta, 
chatur-mukha, sada-Siva, rudra-kanta, i$vara-kanta, mancha-kanta, vedi-kanta, 
and indra-kanta. ‘The eight classes of the five-storeyed buildings are 
called airdvata, bhitta-kanta, visva-kanta, miirti-kanta, yama-kanta, griha- 
kanta, yajna-kanta and brahma-kanta. In the case of the buildings of six 
storeys there are no less than thirteen classes, the technical names of 
which are padma-kanta, kantara, sundara, upakanta, kamala or kamalaksha, 
ratna-kanta, vipulanka, jyotish-kanta, saroruha, vipulakriti, svasti-kanta, 
nandyavarta, and ikshu-kanta. The seven-storeyed buildings are divided 
into eight kinds—pundarika, Srikanta, Sribhoga, dharana, paijara, asrama- 
&4ara, harmya-kanta, and hima-kanta. The eight classes of cight-storeyed 
buildings are called bhi-kanta, bhiipa-kanta, svarga-kanta, mahakanta, jana- 
kanta, tapas-kanta, satya-kanta, and deva-kanta. Those of nine storeys are 


If5 


SILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


divided into seven kinds—saura-kanta, raurava, chandita, bhishana, vivritg 
supratikanta, and visva-kdnta, of which the first four represent the small 
type of nine-storeyed buildings, the next two the intermediate type, 
and the last one the large type. The ten-storeyed buildings are divided 
into six classes, which are named bhil-kanta, chandra-kanta, bhavana-kanta, 
antartksha-kanta, megha-kanta, and abja-kanta. Buildings of eleven storeys 
admit six varieties—sambhu-kanta, ifa-kanta, chakra-kanta, Jama-kanta, 
vajra-kanta and arka-kanta. Finally, buildings of twelve storeys are 
divided into ten kinds—pdjichala, dravida madhya-kanta, kalinga-kanta, 
virata, kerala, vamsa-kanta, magadha-kanta, janaka-kanta and sphirjaka 
(? gurjara). It deserves notice that in this instance the term by which 
the classes are designated are apparently geographical names. 

In Chapter XXX we find, moreover, an elaborate account of stair- 
cases' (sopana). 


CHAPTER XXXI 
Tue Court (Prakara-vidhana) 


The chapter begins with the announcement that five kinds of 
prakara buildings will be described in connexion with bali (offerings), 
parivara (attendant deities), fobhad (beauty), and rakshana (defence). 
But the main object of the chapter is evidently to describe the 
various courts into which the whole compound is divided. The 
description of five such courts is given. The first or innermost court 
is called antar-mandala. The second is known as anta-harad, and the 
third as madhya-hard. The fourth court is technically named frakara. 
The fifth and last one is known as mahdmaryddd or the extreme 
boundary. As the title of the chapter indicates, the greater part of 
it describes only the fourth court. Here it may be briefly observed 
that this prakara is also divided into the jati, chhanda, vikalpa, abhasa 
and kamya classes. Under each class a number of buildings (sald) 
is exhaustively described. A further classification (sankirna, etc.) is 
made with regard to the materials of which the prakara buildings are 
made. These materials are the same as in other cases, namely, stone, 
brick, and timber. 

The shrines of the attendant deities (parivdra-vimdna) and the gate- 
houses (gopuras) are very briefly described in conclusion, the next two 
chapters being entirely devoted to a special treatment of these two 
subjects. 


116 


PLATE XXIX 


ets 
L a , 
y AT MLS LL 


oll (fed LT LL 
v MLL LL 


Sri KASsi-viSyANATHA TEMPLE, RAmEsyARAM, TOGETHER unis 


PLATE XXX 


= 
< 
ina 
> 
oO 
je) 
o) 
kK 
Q 
Ww 
= 


see ee res we rbtsonrt 


SS So IC 
Pee Oke: 


—————————— 


A. GANDHAMADANA OLD TEMPLE. 


B. GREAT GOPU RAM. 


= ONE INCH. 


SCALE 84 FT 


¢. GOPU RAM AMMAN TEMPLE. 


Page 117 


PLAN oF GANDHAMADANA o1p TEMPLE AND GREAT GOPURAM 


INDIA AND ABROAD MANASARA 


CHAPTER XXXII 
Tue ATTENDANT DEITIES (Parivara-vidhana) 


The temples of these deities are directed to be built round the 
prakara. At the eight cardinal points of the innermost or the first 
court, the temples of a group of eight deities are built. Groups of 
sixteen and thirty-two deities are located in the second and the third 
courts respectively. Between the third and the fifth courts is said to 
be a special pavilion. After an elaborate description of the location 
of temples for each of the deities of the three groups, the attendant 
deities of Vishnu are described in detail. 

With regard to the family of Vishnu, it may be pointed out that 
it also includes the same three groups of eight, sixteen, and thirty- 
two deities. The second group relating to Vishnu includes Buddha 
too. The well-known ten incarnations of Vishnu, except the Matsya 
(fish) and the Karma (tortoise), are included in the third group. 

The temples of the Buddhists and Jains, it is expressly stated, should 
be constructed according to the rules of their own Sastras. 

It should be noticed that the description of the temples intended 
for so many deities does not contain any measurements, etc. The 
text is solely occupied with the location of these temples or deities 
in the compound. But a considerable portion of the chapter is 
devoted to the description of mandapas (pavilions) for such purposes 
as bathing, sleeping, assemblies, performances of musicians and 
dancing girls, and stabling of cows and horses. 


CHAPTER XXXIII 


Tue GATE-HOUSE (Gopura-vidhana) 


Gate-houses (gopura) are built in front of each of the five courts 
into which the whole compound is divided. The gopura belonging to 
the first court (antar-mandala) is technically called dvdra-fobha or the 
beauty of the gate’; that belonging to the second court is known as 
dvara-sala or gate-house. The gate-house of the third court is called 
dvara-prasada (gate-palace), and that of the fourth court (prakara) 
has the name of dvdra-harmya (gate-edifice). The gate-house of the 


1 Thi in Prakrit form (dudrasoha) occurs in the Mrichchhakatika (ed. Stenz- 
ler) as ater in the description of Vasantasena’s palace (Act V), which is 


divided into seven courts. 


117 


SILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


fifth or outermost court (mahdmarydda) is known as mahagopura oy 
the great gate-house. 

Each of these five classes of gate-houses is subdivided again into 
three kinds—the small, the intermediate, and the large. Gate-houses 
are exhaustively described under these fifteen kinds. They are further 
divided into ten (? nine) classes with regard to the number of archi- 
tectural members designated as sikhara (domes), stipika (pinnacle), 
gala-kiita (neck-peak), and kshudra-nast (vestibule). A gopura is thus 
technically called Sribhoga when its sikhd is like a Sala, and it has 
a circular surrounding sfipikd, and is furnished with a gala-kita, four 
kshudranasis, and eight mahandsis. The remaining nine (eight) classes 
are Called respectively jaya, Srivisala, vishnu-kanta, indra-kanta, brahma- 
kanta, skanda-kanta, §rikara and saumya-kanta. The name of one of 
these classes is evidently missing. 

The fifteen kinds of gate-houses referred to above may have one 
to sixteen or seventeen storeys. But the details of those of one to 
five storeys only are given, others being left to the discretion of the 
artists and stated to be built in the same way as those described so 
minutely. 

The measurements, both absolute and comparative, of length, 
breadth, and height of each storey belonging to each of the fifteen 
kinds of gate-houses are described at great length. The ornaments 
and mouldings of each storey are also given in detail. The garbha- 
griha (cella or sanctum), as well as all other rooms, together with 
their different parts, such as pillars, entablatures, walls, roofs, floors, 
doors, windows, etc., are exhaustively discussed. 

The measurements, etc., of the gate-houses are discussed in com- 
parison with those of the main buildings also. Then follows a lengthy 
description of their solid (ghana) and hollow (aghana) parts. The 
description of some interior members is also included in this section. 

The chapter closes with an interesting description of windows, 
not only for gate-houses, but also for other kinds of buildings, both 
religious and residential. The general plan of windows seems to be 
this : a post or pillar is fixed in the middle to which are attached 
two perforated screens (jalaka and palika). These admit of various 
patterns, represented by the following names, by which they are classed 
with regard to their shapes, naga-bandha (snake-pattern), valli-bandha 
(creeper pattern), gavaksha (cow’s eye pattern), kufjaraksha (elephant’s 
eye pattern), svastika (cross pattern), sarvato-bhadra (ear pattern), 


118 


SHORE TEMPLE, MAHABALIPURAM 


PLATE XXXI 


Page 118 


_ PLATE XXXII 


od art errr stm. a rs 


SL 


2 nme oid ansntene—f Seed oon inne Henn 


soa. 


Page 119 
i e = See 


-— 


INDIA AND ABROAD MANASARA 


nandyavarta (geometrical pattern) and pushpa-bandha (flower pattern). 
They are decorated with floral and foliated ornaments, as well as 
with decorative devices in imitation of jewels. The measurement 
of length, breadth, and thickness is entirely left to the discretion of 
the artist. But it is stated in conclusion that, according to some 
authorities, the width of the windows for gate-houses varies from 14 
to 5 cubits (hasta), the increment being by six azgulas. As stated 
elsewhere the height is regulated by five formulas, viz., 14, 14, 1, 
2, 2% of the width. 


CHAPTER XXXIV 
Tue Pavition (Mandapa-vidhana) 


The term mandapa generally means a ‘temple, pavilion, bower, 
shed or open hall. But the word has been used in three technical 
senses in this chapter. It is used to imply a single-storeyed house 
in the country, etc., or built on the sea-shore or the bank of a 
river, tank, or lake; secondly, it is used to imply all the detached 
buildings in a compound which is generally divided into five courts. 
But in the most general sense, it implies various sorts of rooms in 
a temple or residential building; for the greater part of this long 
chapter is devoted to a description of these rooms. 

After an account of the architectural members indicated by the 
technical terms Dfitti (foundation wall or floor), alinda (verandah), 
and prapd (shed), follows the lengthy description of mandapas. Seven 
mandapas are said to be built in front of the frasdda or the main 
edifice. They are technically called himaja, ntshadaja, vindhyaja, 
malyaja, pariyatra, gandha-madana and hema-kiita respectively. One is 
said to be used for the purpose of a bath-room, another for a study 
or school (adhyayana), and so forth. Various parts of these buildings, 
such as walls, roofs, floors, verandas, court-yards, doors, windows, 
columns, etc., are described in detail. Besides these seven, various 
other classes of mandapas are also described exhaustively. Their 
technical names, together with the main purposes for which they 
are built, may be given here. 

The meruja-mandapa is used as a library-room, the vijaya for marriage 
ceremonies, the padmaka as a temple kitchen, the sicha as an 
ordinary kitchen, the padma for collecting flowers, the bhadra for a 


119 


SILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


water reservoir, store-house, etc., the siva for unhusking corn, the veda 
for an assembly-hall, the kula-dhdrana for storing perfumes, the 
sukhanga for a guest-house, the darva for an elephant’s stable, and the 
kausika for a horse stable, the saukhyaka and others built on the banks 
of the sea, river, lake, etc., are meant for purposes of pilgrimage, 
and the jayala and others for summer residence. The plan, ornaments, 
etc., of each of these various classes are described in detail. 

The chapter closes with a description of the forms of mandapas. 
Those of temples and of the houses of the Brahmans should have the 
jati shape. The chhanda shape is given to the mandapas of the Kshatriyas, 
the vikalpa shape to those of the Vaisyas, and the dbhasa shape to 
those of the Sidras. But according to some, these four classes are 
also said to be based on the form of the bhadra or front portico. 

The mandapas of two faces are called dandaka and those of three 
faces svastika ; but the latter may also have the /angala or plough shape. 
The mandapas of four faces are known as chatur-mukha, those of five 
faces as sarvato-bhadra, and those of six faces as maulika. 

A short description of mandapas in villages or towns is given at 
the end. Their principal members are said to be the upd (pent roof) . 
prastara (entablature), prachchhadana (roof), sabhd (hall), kita (pinnacle), 
etc. Mandapas are also built on the roadside and elsewhere. 

All classes of mandapas mentioned above are described separately, 
according as they may belong to a temple or to the houses of the 
Brahmanas, the Kshatriyas, the Vaisyas, and the Siidras respectively. 


CHAPTER XXXV 
Tue Srorevep Mansion (Sala-vidhdna) 


The Storeyed Mansions consist of rows of buildings varying from 
one to ten. The blocks of buildings varying in number of storeys up 
to twelve are artistically joined up. They are classified under six main 
groups called dandaka, svastika, maulika, chatur-mukha, sarvatobhadra, and 
vardhamana. Each of these is again subdivided into several types : 
the arrangement of the dapdaka mansion, for instance, is-described 
under eight varieties. The dandaka is an isolated mansion and con- 
sists of a single row of buildings and would look like a stick (dandaka). 
The svasiika mansion is plough-shaped and consists of two rows of 
buildings. The maulika mansion is shaped like a winnowing basket 


120 


INDIA AND ABROAD MANASARA 


and consists of three rows of buildings. The chatur-mukha mansion is 
four-faced and consists of four rows of buildings. The sarvatobhadra 
mansion consists of seven rows of buildings, and the vardhamana of ten 
rows. The huge buildings are naturally meant for kings, to the nine 
classes of whom they are assigned in accordance with the importance 
of the mansions and the rank of the king. But they are also stated to 
be used by the gods, the Brahmanas, the Kshatriyas, the Vaisyas, the 
Siidras, the ascetics, the hermits, the priests, the Buddhists, the warriors 
fighting with the help of the horse, the elephant, and the chariot, 
the artists, and the courtesans. The lay-out, architectural members 
with dimensions, ornaments, and other details are fully described. 

A special feature of the present chapter is the consideration of the 
times and season proper for the building of a sala. Certain months 
and seasons are stated to be quite unsuitable for this purpose. Astro- 
logical and ritualistic considerations form another peculiarity of 
this chapter. Some classes of Salads are said to suit particular people 
born under the influences of certain planets and stars. 

The chapter closes with an account of the rules of shad-varga as 
applied to salds, and with an enumeration of the various parts of 
a Sala. 


CHAPTER XXXVI 


Tue SITUATION AND DIMENSIONS OF DWELLING Houses 
(Griha-mana-sthana-vinydsa) 


The main object of the chapter is to describe the arrangement and 
situation of houses in the compound. The breadth of a house is said 
to be of five kinds, namely, from two or three dandas to ten or eleven 
dandas, the increment being by two dandas. The length may be equal 
to twice the breadth. Houses are stated to be built in a village, 
town, port (patiana), grove, or hermitage, near a hill or mountain, or 
on the bank of a river, etc. 

In Chapter XXXIV various sorts of mandapas have been stated to 
be located in different parts of the five courts into which the whole 
compound of a temple is divided. In the present chapter, structures 
intended for various purposes are located in the different squares into 
which an inhabited area is divided, according to the parama-sadhtka 
plan described in Chapter VII, called Pada-vinyasa. 

121 


SILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE ry 


The Brahma-sthana, or the central square, is stated to be unfit for 
a residential building. The temple of the family god is generally built 
in this part. Round this are constructed the dwelling-houses for the 
master of the family, his wife and children, and Servants, sheds for 
cows, horses, poultry, etc., the kitchen and dining hall, etc., rooms 
for guests, for reading or study, for the daily sacrifices of the upper 
caste people, for amusements and music, for the dancing girls, and 
for all other domestic purposes. The arrangement of these different 
structures is, however, slightly different according to the caste and 
social position of the family. But the general plan of the dwelling. 
houses for a family is the same in all cases. 


CHAPTER XXXVII 
Tue First ENTRY INTO THE House (Griha-pravesa-vidhana) 


The ceremonies in connexion with the opening of and first entry 
into a house are described in detail. An auspicious day and moment, 
and the worship and sacrifice in this connexion, are still usually 
observed in India. The masters of the ceremonies are stated to be 
the sthapati and the sthapaka. They lead the procession in circum- 
ambulating the village and the compound before the ceremonial entry 
into the house. The head of the family and his consort are usually 
the chief figures in these affairs. After completing the worship and 
sacrifice, a prayer is offered to the guardian angel of the house (Griha- 
Lakshmi) to confer male offspring, wealth, and long life, on the master 
of the house. After the solemn entrance into the house has been 
performed, the householder should feed the Brahmans, and present 
the architects and their followers with rich gifts. 


CHAPTER XXXVIII 


THE Location oF Doors (Dodra-sthana) 


Doors and gates have already been described on various occa- 
sions. T'wo separate chapters are now devoted to the arrangement, 
location, measurement, and ornamentation of doors to be used in 
all kinds of buildings. Such a special description of windows has 


1 The mantra to be recited runs : 
@ wart: Tenate gaaaaafaty: 
ATT RV Ayes saa TACIT 11 
122 


INDIA AND ABROAD MANASARA 
already been noted at the end of Chapter XX XIII on gate-ho 
(gopura) . E ao 

It is stated in this chapter that four main doors are constructed 
on the four sides of all kinds of buildings of gods and men. In most 
cases four smaller doors are also made at the four Gordons Man 
other smaller doors are prescribed in the intervening spaces “Drains 
(jala-dvdra) are made underneath the house. 

The main doors are always furnished with a flight of steps. In 
many buildings the entrance-door is made, not at the middle of the 
frontage, but on either side of it. But in some houses they may be 
made in the middle of the front wall. In the case of kitchens. in 
particular, the main doors must be at the middle of the wall. 

It is also stated expressly that where it is inconvenient to make 
so many smaller doors, as prescribed here, they should be replaced 
by windows. 

The materials with which doors are constructed are mainly timber, 
but stone is used in some exceptional cases. 


CHAPTER XXXIX 
Tue MEASUREMENT OF Doors (dvdra-mdna-vidhana) 


The common rule is that the height of a door should be twice 
its breadth. But various alternative measurements are also given. 
The height of the larger doors may vary from 13 cubits (hasta) to 
7 cubits, the increment being by 6 azgulas. The height of the smaller 
doors varies from one cubit to three cubits, the increment being by 
3 angulas. In the former case, therefore, we have twenty-three, in 
the latter seventeen, varieties of dimensions. 

These dimensions are prescribed for doors in the jatt class of build- 
ings. But other measurements are given for doors in houses of the 
chhanda, vikalpa and abhdsa classes. The alterative dimensions are 
modified by the application of the shad-varga formulas. 

The door-posts and other parts of the door are then described 
at great length. Doors are generally of double leaves, but those of 
single leaf are also mentioned. 

Doors are profusely decorated with foliated and floral ornaments, 
The images of Ganega, Sarasvati, and other deities should be carved 


Over the entrance. 
123 


SILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE Iy 


CHAPTER XL 


Tue Royat PALAcE (Raja-griha-vidhana) 


Palaces are divided into nine classes with regard to their size 
according as they may belong to a king of any of the nine classes 
enumerated in the next chapter. Each class of palaces, whether of 
a chakravartin, mahardja, narendra, mandalesa, etc., admits of nine sizes. 
For each one of the nine main classes it is further laid down that it 
should consist of a certain number of halls (salad). Thus the palace 
of the chakravartin, universal monarch or emperor, should have from 
one to seven halls; that of the adhirdja (or mahdraja) from one to six 
halls ; that of the narendra from one to five halls, and so forth. 

Then the location of the various palace buildings is minutely 
described on the basis of the Paramasadhika plan explained in Chapter 
VII called Padavinyasa. 

The Brahma-pitha is installed in the Brahma-sthdna, the square in the 
centre. The main palace of each of the nine classes of kings is then 
located in some of the remaining square —Indra, Varuna, Yama, 
Pushpadanta, etc. Among the other palace buildings enumerated 
we find mention of the residences of the queens, the princesses, and 
the private council-hall. 

Other buildings, which are necessary adjuncts to the dwelling of 
an Indian king, are the coronation pavilion (abhishekadi-mandapa), 
the arsenal (dyudhdlaya), the store-house (vasti-nikshepa-mandapa), the 
house for keeping ornaments (bhishandlaya), the dining-hall (bhojana- 
mandapa), the kitchen (pdchandlaya), the flower pavilion (pushpa- 
mandapa), the baths (majjandlaya), the bed-chamber (sayandlaya), and 
several others. These all belong to the inner part (antah-Sala) of the 
palace. 

In the outer part (bahif-sald) are situated the residences of the 
crown prince (yuvardja), of the family priest (purohita), of the ministers 
and others, likewise the hall of public audience (asthdna-mandapa) , 
temples, etc. 

Pleasure-gardens, flower gardens, groves, tanks, etc., are assigned 
their proper places. Stables for horses, elephants, and cow-sheds, etc., 
are generally made near the main gate. Other animals, which are 
kept within the royal enclosure, are rams, cocks, deer, and antelopes, 
monkeys, tigers, and peacocks. Pavilions to witness ram-fights 
and cock-fights (mesha-yuddhartha-mandapa, kukkuta yuddha-mandapa) 


124, 


PLATE XXXIII 


— 
——_ 


u7 AG ee ee 
ROYAL PALACE FROM M 


Royal Palace, — 
Branma Pith> 
Court Lacios 
Flower Garden 


Maternity = 
Coronation Hall 


Family Priost 

Barber 4 

Palangin Bearer 
. Male Servants - 


pea =—-=225. Temple er 
“726, Dance Pavilion ~. 
. Stable PR 
For Chanting Hymnsfe = 
m Ca 
‘Cow Shod =-=< 
30. For Monkeys . 


Bs 


eo pees : Woes rote aces aueTUNENIN nent i 4 aie 
42. ree : " NOT i eae 14 i oe OLS ; A Hy li, hi 


Roya PALAcR Page 124 


SAW. GANESAN cee a i 
KARAIKUDI. 8. I. R. net 


INDIA AND ABROAD MANASARA 


are specially mentioned. The jail (kdragara) is located in a rather 
out-of-the-way place, such as the bhriga or the antariksha part. At 
the end of the chapter it is stated that, for the rest, the arrange- 
ment is left to the choice of the king and to the discretion of the 
architects. 


CHAPTERS XLI-XLII 


Roya Courts AND CHARACTERISTICS oF KINGS 
(Rajanga-lakshana, Bhipala-lakshana) 


These two chapters deal with the royal courts, the classification of 
kings, the qualities which are required in a good ruler, and so forth. 

Kings are divided, in descending progression of rank, into nine 
classes, namely, chakravartin, mahardja (or adhirdja), mahendra (or narendra) , 
parshnika, pattadhara, mandlesa, pattabhaj, praharaka, and astragrahin. 

The opening and closing lines of Chapter XLI describe the general 
qualifications of all kings. They should know philosophy and religion 
and must be learned in all the Sastras, and in the political, military, 
civil and moral laws. They should be haughty (uddhata), gracious 
(/alita), and generous (udatta) in their behaviour. They should have 
the direct knowledge of and control over the subordinate kings and 


-ministers. They should themselves be great warriors and wise in all 


matters. The treasury should always be kept full and they should 
themselves be religious and of strict morals. They should be the 
protectors of their subjects. They should possess peace of mind, love of ~ 
fame, good taste in matters of art, and fondness for music (Gandharva- 
Sastra) . 

Fea it is stated of each of the nine classes of kings what should be 
the number of his horses, elephants, soldiers, women, and queens. 
The astragrahin, for instance, who is least in rank, is said to possess 
500 horses, 500 elephants, an army of 50,000 soldiers, 500 female 
attendants, and one queen (mahishi). The prahdraka, who follows 
next, has 600 horses, 600 elephants, 100,000 soldiers, 700 beautiful 
women, and two queens. The highest figures are reached in the case 
of the chakravartin or universal monarch. 

Chapter XLII begins with the classification of kings mentioned 
above. The extent of their kingdoms and some special characteristics 
of each of the nine classes of kings are then described. The empire 
of the chakravartin reaches as far as the four oceans (chatuh-sagara). He 


125 


SILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


is the suzerain of all subordinate kings. He is strict in his judgment 
of right and wrong, but protects the people with kindness and mercy, 
He is famous and the most fortunate of all. The next king (maharaja 
or adhirdja) is the lord of seven kingdoms. He has the six principal 
kingly qualities (guna), the six strengths (bala), and the three powers 
(Sakti). He is also versed in politics (ntti). He is born either in the 
solar or in the lunar race. The remaining seven classes of kings are 
similarly described. 

A point of great historical interest in this passage is that royalty is 
no longer the monopoly of the Kshatriyas. A king may belong to 
any of the four castes—the Brahmans, the Kshatriyas, the Vaisyas, 
and even the Siidras. The frahdraka is expressly stated to belong to 
any of the four castes. 

The nine kinds of crowns, which pertain to these nine classes of 
kings, are then described. This subject, however, is more elaborately 
treated in Chapter XLIX (Abhisheka-lakshana). Next comes the 
description of the nine kinds of thrones used by the nine classes 
of kings. Here other royal insignia, particularly the white umbrella 
(dhavala-chhattra), and the chowrie or fly-whisk made of the yak’s tail 
(chamara) are also mentioned. Thrones, it will be noticed, are fully 
dealt with in Chapter XLV (Strhdsana-lakshana-vidhana). 

The next point of importance is the rate of royal revenue. The 
chakravartin takes only one-tenth of the produce as his share. The 
mahargja takes one-sixth, the narendra one-fifth, the pdarshnika one- 
quarter, the fattadhara one-third ; the exact proportions of the other 
kings’ shares are not given. No tax should be illegally imposed, 
Punishment and fines should be legal and moderate. The temples, 
as well as the Brahmans, the hermits and similar people should 
be supported by the state. 

At the end of the chapter it is stated that this description of kings 
is made on the authority of the Vedas, the Puranas, and the Sastras. 


1 The six qualities (guna) of a king are found in Manu, VII, 160: 
afer 4 fang ta artaraaaa a1 dehard dart genet faeqaeaar | 

‘ Let him [the king] constantly think of the six measures of royal policy (guna), 
viz. alliance, war, marching, halting, dividing the army, and seeking protection 
(Bihler, S. B. H., XXV, p. 241). But according to another source the six gunas or 
qualities of a king are valour, energy, firmness, ability, liberality and majesty. 
The three royal powers (Sakti) are found in the Amarakosha 2, 8, 1, 19—Saktayas 
tisrah prabhdvotsaha mantrajah, ‘ the three powers come forth from majesty, energy, 
and good counsel.’ / 


126 


INDIA AND ABROAD MANASARA 


CHAPTER XLIII 
Cars AND CHARIOTS (Ratha-lakshana-vidhana) 


Cars and chariots are constructed for the ceremonial and ordinary 
use of gods, Brahmans and kings, as well as for war and other pur- 
poses. ‘The wheels and other parts of cars, their shapes, their measure- 
ments, their ornamentations and mouldings are described in order. 

The chapter begins with a minute description of the wheel, the most 
important part of the car. It is always circular, and is furnished with 
a strong tyre of similar shape. All its parts, together with their 
measurements, are described in detail—the kukshi (navel, lit. belly), 
aksha (axle), Sikha or danta (axle-band), chhidra (hole) and the Kila 
(axle-bolt, jlinch-pin), etc. Particular trees yielding timber for the 
wheel are enumerated. On a double support (called ddhdra and upa- 
dhara), which rests on the axles, is raised a lofty structure which is 
provided with balconies (bhadra) and profusely decorated. It may 
have as many as nine storeys, the height of each upper storey 
being smaller than that of the one just preceding. The exact propor- 
tion is not given. 

The forms of cars are next discussed. With regard to their shapes, 
cars are divided into seven classes—nabhasvad-bhadraka, prabhanjana- 
bhadraka, nivata-bhadraka, pavana-bhadraka, prishada-bhadraka, indraka-(or 
chandraka-) bhadraka, and anila-bhadraka. ‘The first of these is square, 
the second hexagonal, the third should have two bhadras, and the 
fourth three bhadras, the fifth and the sixth should have ten bhadras, 
and the last one should be furnished with twelve bhadras. . 

The description of the different shapes of cars is rather confusing. 
According to another classification given here, the square cars are 
called ndgara, the octagonal ones drdavida, the circular ones vesara, the 
hexagonal ones dndhra, and the oval ones kalinga. 

These cars, in accordance with the different purposes referred 
to above, have various kinds of wheels and other members. Thus a 
fighting car has three wheels, the car for mock-fighting has four wheels, 
one for ordinary festivals (nttyotsava) has five wheels, one for special 
festivals (mahotsava) may have six, seven, eight, nine or ten wheels. 
In the same manner the number of vedis (platforms) varies according 
to the special purpose for which a car is to be used. 

Thus it is stated that the chariot of the universal monarch (sdrva- 
bhauma) should have one to nine vedikas, that of the mahardja one to 


127 


SILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


seven vedikds, that of the marendra one to five vedikas, and so 
forth. The cars of Vishnu and Siva should consist of one to nine 
vedikas, those of Buddhist and Jain deities one to seven vedikds and 

= the case of other gods the number should be four, or Pe: to 
ve. 

These cars should be decorated with peacocks’ feathers, chowries 
arches (torana), little bells, bright mirrors, fans and garlands, Miner 
should be also carved images of various deities, particularly on the 
upper part of the structure, while the basement is adorned with 
representations of lions, elephants, and crocodiles (hari-kari-makara- 
ripath), with foliated ornamentation and with figures of dancers 
(nataka), bhiitas and yakshas. 


CHAPTER XLIV 
Coucues (Sayana-vidhana) 


Couches are meant for the use of deities, the twice-born, and mem- 
bers of other castes. They are said to be of two kinds, the small 
(bala-paryanka) and the large (paryanka), the one being distinguished 
from the other by its size alone. 

The measurement and various parts of the two kinds of couches 
are described separately. The width of the béla-paryanka may vary 
from 11 to 25 angulas, the increment being by 2 angulas. This makes 
eight varieties. The faryanka proper admits of nine varieties, as 
they may be from 21 to 37 angulas in width with increments of 2 
angulas. 

It may be pointed out that they are generally furnished with four 
legs, and castors are attached to the legs so that they may easily be 
moved from one place to another. The legs of royal couches should 
be decorated with lions. The proportion of breadth to length shows 
that couches are generally rectangular in shape. 

Special mention is made of swings suspended from four chains, 
which are said to be used by the gods, the Brahmans, the Kshatriyas, 
the Vaisyas, etc. 

The material of which couches and seats (dsana) are constructed is 
the wood of certain trees. For the legs special kinds of timber are 


recommended. 
128 


INDIA AND ABROAD MANASARA 


CHAPTER XLV 
THRONES ($7 mhasana-lakshana-vidhana) 


The expression siihdsana implies a seat marked with a lion. This 
lion-seat or throne is made for the use of deities and kings. Royal 
thrones are divided into four classes. The prathamasana is said to be fit 
for the first (prathama) coronation, the mangala throne for the coronation 
called mangala. The vira throne for the vira coronation, and the vijaya 
throne for the vijaya coronation. What is evidently meant is that these 
four thrones are employed for the four successive stages of the coro- 


- nation of one and the same king. 


As for the deities, the nityarchana throne, as the name indicates, 
is used for daily worship, the nityotsava throne for ordinary festivities, 
the viSesharchana throne for special worship, and the mahotsava throne 
for great festivals. 

Next comes a further division of thrones into ten kinds. An account 
of the general plan, as well as the measurements of the various parts of 
them, is given in detail. They are technically called padmdsana, padma- 
kesara, padma-bhadra, Sribhadra, Srivisdla, sribandha, Srimukha, bhadrasana, 
padma-bandha and pada-bandha. Nine kinds of dimensions are given to 
each of the above-mentioned thrones. The right proportion in each 
case should be selected by the application of the rules of shad-varga. 

Of the ten kinds, the first, padmdsana, is used as the throne for 
Siva or Vishnu, the padma-kefara for the other gods and for the chak- 
ravartin, the padma-bhadra for the adhirdja (i.e. the mahdardja), the 
Sribhadra is suitable for the adhirdja and the narendra, the Srivifala for 
the narendra and the parshnika, the Sribandha for the parshnika and the 
pattadhara, the Ssrimukha for the mandalefa, the bhadrasana for the 
pattabhdj, the padma-bandha for the prahdraka, and the pada-bandha throne 
for the astragrahin. It is expressly stated that lion-shaped legs should 
not be made for the throne of the last class of kings; but in the case 
of all other kings, the thrones are marked with lions and furnished 
with six legs. They are generally placed facing the east. The 
thrones of deities should face the four quarters. 

At the end of the chapter the author says that the ‘ thrones of Vishnu, 
Rudra, Jinaka, Indra, and all the other prominent gods, and also 
of the kings have thus been described.’ It should be noticed that in 
the description itself no reference whatever is made to thrones of 
the Buddhist or Jain deities, as the term Jinaka would seem to imply. 


129 


g1LPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE In 


CHAPTER XLVI 
Arcues (Torana-vidhana) 


The torana, or arch, is stated to be an ornament for the thrones (Gsana) 
of gods and kings. It is supported on dwarf pillars (anghri), which 
rest on the pedestal (fitha) of the image. The arch admits of various 
shapes. It may be circular, triangular, crescent-shaped, bow-shaped, 
or of any other suitable form. Directions for making these arches, as 
well as the measurements of their constituent parts, are given in detail. 
With regard to their ornamentation, arches are divided into four kinds, 
technically called patra-torana (foliated arch), pushpa-torana (floral arch), 
ratna-torana (jewelled arch), and chitra-torana (ornamental arch). 

The various ornaments of arches are then described in detail. The 
top of the forana should be decorated with figures of the heavenly 
musicians, Tumburu and Narada, while makaras (crocodiles) are placed 
at the sides. The arch is supported by leogryphs (vyalz), which are 
placed on both sides of the pillars. For the rest the fatra-torana, as 
the name indicates, is mainly adorned with foliated ornaments, the 
pushpa-torana with flowers, and the ratna-torana with jewels. Among 
the other decorative devices mentioned we find the effigies of different 
classes of semi-divine beings, such as yakshas, vidyddharas, kinnaras, 
and kinnaris. At the end of the chapter it is said that arches may also 
be made without any ornamentation (chitra-hina). 


CHAPTER XLVII 


THe Tueatre (Madhyaranga-vidhana) 


In the first verse we meet with the expression mukta-prapanga, which 
appears to be used in the same sense as madhya-raga. It is provided 
with dwarf pillars or pilasters (anghri-pada), and consists of various 
other members (masiiraka, vedi, maficha, kuttima, upapitha, etc.), and is 
decorated with uttaras, vdjanas, mushti-bandhas and lupas. It should be 
furnished with four bhadras (or with one bhadra) and with eight or 
sixteen kshudra-ndsis. The upper portion is adorned with figures 
of leogryphs (vyali) and crocodiles (makara). From the last but one 
verse of the chapter it is evident that there must be a close connexion 
between the mukta-parapiga, on the one hand, and the sihdsana, the 
makara-torana and the kalpa-oriksha, on the other hand, the latter three 


130 


INDIA AND ABROAD . MANASARA 


subjects being discussed in the two immediately preceding and the 
following chapters. 

From this verse it will be seen that the materials to be used for the 
mukta-prapanga, etc., are wood, stone, brick (terra-cotta ?) and various 
kinds of metal (Joka, literally iron). 


CHAPTER XLVIII 
THE ORNAMENTAL TREES (Kalpa-vriksha-vidhana) 


The name of the chapter is Kalpa-vriksha, which literally means a 
mythical tree granting all wishes or, in other words, an all-productive 
tree. But here it is undoubtedly a decorative device surmounting a 
seat (dsana) or throne. It is also mentioned in connexion with the 
mukta-prapanga, the mandapa, and the makara-torana. 

The minute description and measurement of the various parts of 
the tree are given. Its trunk (fdda) is wound with a serpent, with 
expanded five-fold hood. The measurements of the snake, of its hood, 
and of its tail are described in detail. The number of branches as well 
as their size varies according to the special purpose of the throne, for 
the decoration of which the tree is meant. The tree is beautifully 
decorated with creepers, leaves, and flowers of various colours and 
forms. Jewels and garlands of pearls are inserted in suitable places. 
The figures of deities, stddhas, vidyddharas, monkeys, etc., are placed in 
the intervals between the branches. 

Many other particulars regarding this ornamental tree are left to 
the discretion of the artist. 


CHAPTER XLIX 


Crowns AND Coronation (Abhisheka-lakshana-vidhana) 


The chapter is divided into two parts: the first part describes the 
crowns of gods and kings, and the second deals with the ceremonies of 
the coronation of kings. 

The chapter opens very unusually with the description of the lavish 
presents to be made to the architects. These gifts consist, among other 
things, of girls, wealth, land, houses, and servants, both male and 
female. 

After this introduction there follows an enumeration of the various 
headdreésses used by gods and kings, namely, jata, mauli, kirtta, karanda, 


131 


SILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


Sirastraka, kundala (kuntala?), kesa-bandha, dhammilla, alaka, chadé, mukuta 
and patia (turban). 

Of these, the last-mentioned is subdivided into three kinds, called 
foliated, jewelled, and floral turbans (patra-patta, ratana-patta, and 
pushpa-patta). 

The jatd (matted hair) and the mukuta (lit. diadem) are said to suit 
Brahma and Siva. The kirita and mukuta are suited to Narayana 
(ie. Vishnu). Other minor gods wear the Aaranda and mukuta. 
The love-goddess, Rati (Manonmani), wears a jata, mault, mandala, or 
kundala. Sarasvati and Savitri put on a kega-bandha and a kundala. All 
the female deities may wear a karanda or mukuta. 

Among the kings, the chakravartin (sdroabhauma) and the adhirdja 
wear the kirita. The narendra puts on a karanda, and the pdarshnika 
a Sirastraka. But the chakravartin and other kings may wear a karanda or 
mukuta. The patra-patta is suited to the patta-dhara, the ratna-patta to 
the mandalesa, the pushpa-patta to the pattabhaj, and the pushpa-mdalya 
(flower wreath) to the praharaka and the astragraha. 

The kundala (or kuntala) and mukufa are prescribed for the queen 
of a chakravartin, the kefabandha for the queens of an adhirdja and a 
narendra, the dhammilla and kumuda-kuntala for the queens of a parshnika, 
a pattadhara, a mandalesa or a pattabhdaj, and the alaka and chida for 
the queens of a praharaka and an astragraha. 

The height of a crown varies with the importance of the divine or 
royal bearers ; it is set forth at considerable length. Next is described in 
detail the number of gold pieces and precious jewels in the crowns 
worn by the kings of various ranks and by their consorts. The forms 
of these crowns are then described. 

The second part of the chapter deals with the royal coronation 
(abhisheka). In the coronation ceremonies of the chakravartin and other 
kings, four stages are prescribed, which are called prathama (here called 
prapta), mangala, vira, and vijaya. In this matter, too, the architects 
take a leading part. The sthapati, the sthapaka, and the Brahman 
priest perform the azkurarpana and all other ceremonies ending with 
the adhivdsana. Afterwards the king is anointed with various auspicious 
substances. This is the abhisheka proper. The king is then adorned 
with the royal robes, the sacred thread and various ornaments, and led 
to the coronation hall (abhisheka-mandapa) which is furnished with the 
madhra-ranga, the royal thrones, the wish-yielding tree (kalpa-vriksha) , 

132 


INDIA AND ABROAD his caainth 
3 ornamental arch (torana), and other emblems ofempire.1 The king 
and the queen take their places side by side on their thrones, the 
queen being on the left side of the king. The crown is held by the 
leading priests (purohita-purogah) ; but it is actually placed on the king’s 
head by the sthapati and the two sthapakas at an auspicious moment 
during the pronouncement of svasti and other auspicious sounds. After 
this the king is garlanded, anointed, and besprinkled with various 
substances of good augury. Then the king mounts an elephant and 
circumambulates the city amidst acclamations of felicity. On the 
occasion of the entry into the palace, a curious ceremony takes place 
in order to determine the success awaiting the new king, as well as 
the future prosperity of the kingdom. Various auspicious and inaus- 
picious things are arranged in a hall in the palace. The king is led 
there blind-folded and has to pick up anything he chooses. The thing 
thus picked up by the blind-folded king points to the prosperity of 
the people and victory of the king, or the opposite. 

“If the rice-porridge or rice be touched [by him] there will be 
an increase of rice. If the heap of corn is touched by the [royal] hand 
there will be plenty of food (swbhiksha). If gold and other precious 
metals be touched, it indicates that the subjects will prosper. If the 
sword or other weapons be touched, it bespeaks the king’s prowess. 
It would be unfortunate for the whole kingdom, if any inauspicious 
things be touched by the king.’ 

The chapter closes with a recapitulation of the four forms of 
coronation, the directions as to the conduct of the ceremonial regal 
procession and a reference to the authorities (Vedas and Puranas) 
under which the coronation ceremonies are prescribed. 


CHAPTER L 


Tur ORNAMENTS OF THF Bopy AND ARTICLES OF FURNITURE 
(Bhishana-lakshana-vidhana) 


In the first verse it is announced that the chapter is devoted to a des- 
cription of the ornaments of gods and kings. In reality, only the first 
part of the chapter deals with ornaments proper, and the remaining 


. Cf. Hultzsch, South Indian Inscription, Vol. I, p. 54) 11, 23-255 where in an 
Eastern Chalukya grant the makaratorana 1s mentioned among the royal pee ies 
Professor Hultzsch quotes Sanderson’s Canarese Dictionary, where nae wor rs 
explained as ‘an honorary wreath or string of flowers, etc., raised upon poles 
and carried in front of one, as an emblem of distinction. 


133 


Be PAtAGTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


portion deal with certain miscellaneous articles of furniture, such 
as lamp-posts, fans, mirrors, swings, and so forth. 

The first part is called ‘ ornaments of the body ’ (arga-bhishana), 
and the second, external ornaments (bahir-bhishana). 

Ornaments proper are here divided into four classes, namely, patra- 
kalpa, chitra-kalpa, raina-kalpa, and misrita. All these are suited to the 
deities. The emperor or universal monarch (chakravartin, sdrvabhauma) 
can put on all these ornaments excepting the patra-kalpa. The adhirdja 
and narendra can wear both the ratna-kalpa and the misrita. The misra- 
kalpa is prescribed for all other kings. 

The patra-kalpa ornaments are so called, because they show foliated 
decoration. ‘The chitra-kalpa kind consists of floral and foliated 
designs, precious stones, and images (nataka). The ratna-kalpa variety 
is made of flowers and jewels. The miSra-kalpa decoration consists of 
leaves and jewels, and, in short, a mixture of all others. These four 
kinds, it should be observed, are specially made for the images of 
gods and kings only. 

The following is a list of the personal ornaments mentioned in the 
course of the chapter : 

Kirita—a diadem, a crown. 

Siro-vibhishana—a head ornament. 

Chidamani—a crest-jewel. 

Kundala—an. ear-ring. 

Tatanka (or tadanka)—a kind of ear ornament. 

Makara-bhiishana—an ear-pendant decorated with crocodile pattern 
(makarankita-kundala). 

Kankana—a bracelet. 

Keyitra, kataka—an armlet worn on the upper-arm. 

Valaya—an armlet worn round the upper-arm (bahumiile) or on the 
forearm (prakoshtha). 

Pirima—for the upper-arm. 

Mani-bandha-kalapa!—a jewelled ornament worn on the forearm. 

Kinkini-valaya—a bracelet (or anklet) fitted with little bells. 

Anguliyaka—a finger-ring. 

Raindngultyaka—a. jewelled finger-ring. 

aon 2 
us heii st —a string of pearls worn round the neck. 


1 Of. mukia-kalapa (Kumara-sambhava, 1, 43). 
According to Brthat-samhita, LXXXII, 32, a chain of 108 strings is styled a 
hara and a chain of 64 strings an ardhahara. Kern’s Verspr. Geschr., Vol. 11, p- 101+ 


134 


INDIA AND ABROAD ANAS 

Mala—a garland or necklace hangi 

ae garland of wild fone Niamice oO 

Nakshatra-mala'—a necklace of 27 pearls. 

Daman—a garland or string worn round the shoulders. 

Stana-stitra 

Suvarna-sitra § 

Pura-siira—a cord or chain worn round the chest. 

Udara-bandha—a girdle worn round the waist. 

Kati-sitra—a cord or chain round the loins. 

Mekhala—a girdle, a belt. 

Suvayna-kafichuka—a golden cuirass (or bodice). 

Nipura—an anklet. 

Valaya—a bracelet. 

Pada-jala-bhiishana—a net-like ornament worn on the feet.” 

The following articles, which are reckoned to belong to the ‘ exter- 
nal’ ornaments (bahirbhishana), are described in great detail : (1) the 
dipadanda (lamp-post); (2) the yajana (fan); (3) the darpana (mirror); 
(4) the mafjiisha (basket, chest, box); (5) the dola (swing or palanquin); 
(6) the tuld (balance) and (7) the paijara (cage), nida (nest) for 
domestic animals and birds. 

The lamp-posts (dipa-danda)* are of two kinds, the stationary, 
placed in front of the house, and the movable. The former are made 
of wood, iron, or stone, the latter of wood or iron. They may be 
square, octagonal, or circular in shape. The vedika (platform) or 
the pedestal at the bottom of these is generally shaped like a lotus. 
Lamp-posts generally taper from the bottom upwards. Various 
other parts and also the mouldings of lamp-posts are described in 
detail. Their measurements are also given. Roe: 

The fan-post (vyajana-danda), as well as the fan itself, is described in 
alike manner. ‘These posts are made of timber or iron, but the fans 
appear to be made of leather. 


1 A nakshatra-mala (lit. a star-cluster) consists of 27 pearls in accordance with 
the number of nakshatras or lunar mansions. Cf. Byihat-samhita, LXXXII, 34. ; 

2 A few more terms of uncertain meaning are mentioned, namely : viseshika 
(=tilaka ?), balapatta, chulika, keSakutaka and mallika. on oie - 

3 Tn literature we find the evidently synonymous expression dipauy i ied ie 
lamp-tree). Mahabh. XII, 7204 5 XIV, 1737. Ram. (ed. Gorresio); eg e - 
Buddhacharita (ed. Cowell), V, 44. Monumental lamp pillars of eee 
days designated by the name of dipdan, are found especially in the d edi fin 
India. Cf. Fergusson, History of Indian and Eastern Architecture, revised © ition, 
Vol. I, pp. 347 sq., and II, 81. 


—a cord or chain worn round the breasts. 


135 


§ILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


Nine alternative measurements are prescribed for the mirror, 
namely, from 5 (or 6) azigulas up to 21 (or 22) azgulas. The mirror 
should be quite circular (suvritta), with the edge a little raised, 
The surface must be perfectly bright, the rim being decorated 
with linear ornaments (rekhd) and the reverse with the figures of 
Lakskmi and others. An account of the various parts is given in 
detail. 

Three kinds of majjiishd are described in detail. They are made 
of either timber or iron, and are square, rectangular, or circular in 
shape. They generally consist of one, two or three compartments 
or chambers (koshiha). The parna-maijisha looks like a box or trunk. 
The taila (oil) manjishd is apparently a receptacle for oil. It does not 
differ from the other, except in its greater height. The third kind is 
called vastra-manj isha and is easily identified with a wardrobe or linen- 
chest. Its breadth is said to vary from one to three cubits, the height 
and length being proportionate to the breadth. 

The word dold means both a swing and a palanquin; but as the 
description opens with the statement that the height of the post or 
pillar (pada) varies from three toeight cubits, there can be little 
doubt that the passage refers to a swing. We may assume that 
the phalaka, which is repeatedly mentioned in this connexion, must 
be the swing-board. The swing is said to be used by both gods and 
men. 

The balance? consists of the horizontal balancing rod or beam, the 
strings by which the scale pans are suspended, and the scale pans 
themselves. The two pans are made of iron, the rod of timber or iron, 
and the jihad (lit. tongue) and the torana (lit. arch) are always made 
of iron. The various parts of he balance are described minutely, 
together with their measurements. 

A large portion of the chapter is devoted to a description of cages 
(parjara). A number of birds and other animals are enumerated, and 
the size of the cage in which they are kept is given, the measurements 


1 From the description given in the text it may be conjectured that the royal 
balance in question was meant to be used by kings in performing the ceremony 
of having themselves weighed against gold and precious stones which were after- 
wards distributed among the Brahmans. This ceremony, known as iuld-purusha- 
dana, was performed on certain special occasions, such as the coronation, or on 
the day of a solar or lunar eclipse, or on New Year’s day. Cf. A. H. Longhurst, 
The Tuld-purusha-dana Monument at Hampi. Annual Report, Archaeological Survey of 
India for 1912-13, pp. 142 sq., Plate LXXXIV. 


136 


INDIA AND ABROAD MANASARA 


admitting in each instance of nine different variectics. The following 
is a complete list : 


Size of cage Increment 
Mriga-nabhi-biddla (musk cat) ..  1—2 hastas 3 angulas. 
Suka (parrot) is .» 923 angulas! a es 
Chataka (rains-cuckoo or cuculus 
melanoleucus) , 7—23 5, DON. 


Chakora (partridge or perdix rufa) 7—23 
Marala (a crow-pheasant, a goose 


or duck) .. ose oo) aot Was Oe make 
Pardavata (turtledove) 2s) Bt es ot ae 
Nilakantha (roller) .. wa e253) Gr 33 
Kuijariya (ground-man) oie. OTE a Bs Qe, 
Khanjarita (wag-tail) oo Oe oes Ober 
Kukkuta (cock) ss .. 5-31 4, Pigeaee 
Kulala (phasianus gallus) .. I5-3I 4 ees 
Nakula (mongoose, viverra tchneu- 

mon) one ats i) DT —=27 55 Oa. 
Titiirt (francolin partridge) fa 23s DPS 
Godha(ra) (alligator) -- °9-25 » DP ings 
Vydaghra (tiger) a .. I$—3% hastas 6: he 


CHAPTER LI 
Ture Trap (Trimirti-lakshaéna-vidhana) 


The Indian Triad, to which the title of the chapter refers, consists 
of the three great gods, Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva. The chapter may 
be divided into two parts. The first part deals with the materials 
(dravya) of which the idols of all other deities, as well as of these three, 
are made. The second part describes the external features of the 
Triad. 

The materials for making idols are nine, namely, gold, silver, copper 
(témra), stone, wood, sudha (stucco, also mortar and plaster), sarkara 
(lit. gravel or grit), abhdsa (glass) and earth (terra-cotta). All the 
materials enumerated are well known except dbhdsa, of which a 
special description is given. 

1 Eyidently there is a mistake here in the figures, which would yield only eight 


varieties of size, Another mistake seems to be in the size of cages, which in 
many cases is absurdly small. 


TSH 


SILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


Abhasa is subdivided into three kinds, called chitra, ardha-chitra, and 
abhisa proper. If it is perfectly transparent or visible (sarvdiga- 
drisyamana, lit. which can be completely seen through), it is called 
chitra; if only half transparent or visible, it is known as ardha-chitra ; 
and in case it is partially (Mt. one-fourth) transparent or visible, it is 
called dbhdsa proper. 

The second part begins with an account of the different classes of 
images. An idol may be stationary (sthdvara) or movable (jatigama), 
erect, sitting, or recumbent. The movable images are used especially 
on the occasion of festivals. The three or four poses (bhanga), called 
abhanga, samabhanga, and tribhanga, are discussed more fully at the end 
of Chapter LXVII. 

The remaining portion of the chapter is devoted to a minute 
description of the images of Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva, the three 
gods constituting the Trimirt. 

Brahma should have four arms and four faces. He should wear a 
diadem and the matted hair of an ascetic (jatd-mukuta-mandita). Two 
of his hands should be in the gift-bestowing (varada) and refuge- 
granting (abhaya) attitudes. The four attributes held in his hands 
are the water-pot (kundika), the rosary (aksha-mala), and the large 
and small sacrificial ladles (sruk-sruva). The various ornaments, with 
which his body is to be adorned, are described in great detail. As to 
his clothes, he is said to wear a strip of bark (chira) and an upper 
garment (utiartya). His whole body should be of golden colour. 
Brahma is accompanied by his two faktis (female energies), the 
goddesses Sarasvati and Savitri standing to his right and left 
respectively. 

Vishnu is also four-armed (chatur-bhuja), but has one head. His 
headgear is the diadem called kiritta. He wears a yellow garment, 
while the colour of his body is dark blue (Sydma). His chest is adorned 
with the symbol called Srivatsa. Two of his hands are in the gift- 
bestowing and refuge-granting attitudes. His attributes are the lotus 
flower, the mace (gada@), the discus (chakra), and the conch-shell called 
panchajanya. Among the numerous ornaments which bedeck his limbs, 
special mention is made of the graceful garland of wild flowers 
(vana-mala) which hangs down by both his legs. At the back of his 
head there is an ornamental nimbus (siras-chakra, lit. a head-disc). 
Vishnu is likewise attended by two goddesses (Sakti), apparently 
Lakshmi and Bhi-devi (the Earth-goddess) 


138 


INDIA AND ABROAD STAN eae 


Siva, the third member of the Triad, is four-armed and is, more- 
over, distinguished by a third eye, which is placed in the middle of 
his forehead. Like Brahma, he wears the matted hair of the ascetic. 
The figure of Ganga (the river personified), as well as the crescent, are 
inserted in his headdress, the latter on the left side. On the left side 
of his neck there is the mark of the deadly poison kdlakiita. His dress 
consists of a tiger skin reaching down to the knees, and a waist-cloth. 
His complexion is said to be red. Two of his hands are in the 
attitude of granting a boon (vara) and of conferring security (abhaya) . 
In the remaining two hands he holds an antelope (harina) and a 
tabor or hand-drum.? Siva is accompanied by the goddess Parvati, 
who keeps standing or seated on his left side. 

Images of the three members of the Triad are said to be measured 
in the largest type of the dafa-tdala measurement and those of their 
consorts in the middle type. The particulars of these two types of 
measurement are not discussed here, but reserved for an elaborate 
treatment in two separate chapters. 

The pedestals are also dealt with in a separate chapter. Here it is 
very briefly stated that the pedestals of the Triad should be of the 
padma-pitha or the maha-pitha kind, and be furnished with a prapa 
(canal), a torana (ornamental arch), and kalpa-vriksha (ornamental 
tree). 

ae chapter closes with a statement that the particulars not men- 
tioned here with regard to the making of these idols, should be supplied 
according to the rules of the Sdastras. 


CHAPTER LII 
Tur Puauus (Liga-vidhana)® 


Various classifications of phalli are given. They are classified first 
into six heads—saiva, pasupata, kala-mukha, mahdvrata, vdma, and 
bhairava; secondly, into four—samakarna, vardhamana, Sivaika, and 


1 Elsewhere the complexion of Siva is stated to be white. — ; 

2'The name of the second attribute, which occurs _also in the iconographic 
portion of Chapter VII, appears to be dhakka. But this word usually indicates a 
large kettle-drum, whereas the tabor, which is one of Siva’s emblems, is called 
to The phallus worship is very popular in India : this is unmistakably proved by 
the fact that the number of lingas or phalli in India is estimated at thirty millions, 
of which the best known are VisveSvara at Benares, Somanatha in Gujarat, 


Mahakala at Ujjayini, etc. 
139 


SILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE In 


svastika, fit to be worshipped by Brahmans, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas, and 
Siidras respectively ; thirdly, into four, with regard to height—jaii, 
chhanda, vikalpa, and abhasa; fourthly, into three, with regard to 
width—ndagara, dravida, and vesara ; fifthly, into four—datvika, manusha, 
ganava, and Grsha, the four together being called svayambhi or udbhuta ; 
sixthly, into two—dimartha (for one’s own worship), and fardrtha, 
(it. for others, for public worship) ; again into two—ekaliziga (single), 
and bahu-linga (phalli in a group); or into many—vajra, suvarna, 
etc., with regard to the material; and lastly into the kshanika (for 
temporary worship) class as constrasted with the permanent ones. 
All these kinds of phalli are described at great length. Various 
alternative measurements are prescribed for each of them. In some 
cases as many as thirty-six alternative heights are suggested. But 
in most cases their number is nine. The nine alternative heights of 
the phallus are determined in some cases by a comparison with 
different parts of the body of the worshipper (yajamdna). The height 
of the phallus may reach the worshipper’s sex organ, navel, heart, 
breast, arm-joint (bahu-simanta), chin, nose, eye, or be equal to his 
full length. Another comparative measurement is given with regard 
to the garbha-grtha (the cella of the temple in which the phallus is en- 
shrined). Various absolute measurements also are given in some 
cases. These measurements vary according to the four classes, jai, 
chhanda, vikalpa, and abhdsa, mentioned above. In the jati class the 
height may vary from 1 to 9 cubits (hasta), the increment being 1 
hasta. The chhanda class admits of nine varieties, namely, from # to 
6{ cubits, the increment in this case being 3 hasta. In the third class 
(vikalpa) the hight varies from 1 to 4% hastas with increments of 4 
hasta, and in the fourth class (abhdsa) from 4 to 24 hastas with incre 
ments of 4 hasta. Thus each of the four said classes admits of nine 
varieties of height. The breadth of the phallus is in like manner 
discussed at great length. The utility of so many alternative measure- 
ments is discussed in connexion with the application of the rules of 
qadi-shadvarga described in detail at the end of the chapter. 

The second part deals with the pitha, which is the stand upon which 
the phallus proper is placed. The prandla (lit. canal, drain) or 


1 The term svayambhit (self-existent, self-created) indicates natural objects of 
worship. Such suayambhi-liigas are even to this day worshipped at several firthas 
of Kashmir. Cf. Kalhana’s RG@atarangint, a chronicle of the kings of Kasmir 
translated by M. A. Stein, Vol. I, p. 22 (note 1, 113). 


140 


INDIA AND ABROAD MANASARA 


yonidodra, and all other parts of the pitha are described n detail, 
together with their measurements. The same subject is discussed in 
greater detail in the next chapter. The general appearance of a 
phallus is well known ; the Manasara does not deviate much from it. 
The mala or the lower part, technically called Brahma-bhaga is square 
(chatur-asra, lit. four-cornered), whereas the middle part, called 
Vishnubhaga, is octagonal (ashidgrabha), and the upper part, called 
Siva-bhaga, is round. But these shapes of the three parts may be 
interchanged in some cases. The top is sometimes shaped like a bud 
(kudmala) or a leaf (pattra).+ 

The phallus proper and the fitha are generally made of the same 
material. But when they are made of very precious substances, such 
as jewels, gold, etc., the material of the two may differ. The fitha is 
mostly made of marbles of various colours such as white, red, yellow, 
black, etc. Precious stones are inserted in the different parts of the 
phallus. 

The chapter closes with an account of the various fruits to be derived 
from phallus worship, and of the formulas of the dyddi-shadvarga. 


CHAPTER LII 


Tue ALTAR (Pitha-lakshana-vidhana) 


It has been pointed out in the previous chapter that the pitha* 
forms the yoni or the lower part of the phallus. The fitha must match 
the phallus, of which it forms the lower member. There must, conse- 
quently, be as many kinds of pithas as there are of the phalli. But 
the mouldings of the pitha are described under four classes, technically 
called, bhadra-pitha, Sribhadra, Srivigala, and upapitha. The principal 
parts of the pitha are the nala (lit. canal), the jala-dhara (lit. drain), 
the ghrita-vari, the nimna, and the pattikd. These appear to have been 
intended to represent the various parts of which an ordinary yont 
(female organ) is formed. The name of the principal mouldings are 
the following prathama or janman, padma, kshepana, kandhara, kampa, 
urdhva-padma, vajana, ghrita-vari, and vritta-kumbha. 


1 A variant reading gives chhatira (an umbrella). 

2The term ‘ pitha’ means a stool, seat, chair, throne, pedestal, an altar. The 
well-known fifty-one pitha-sthanas_are the sacred spots where the parts of the body 
of Sati (Parvati), the consort of Siva, fell after she had been cut to pieces by the 
discus of Vishnu. As the liga or phallus symbolically represents Siva, so the pitha 
does his consort Parvati. 


141 


§ILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


A minute description and measurement of all these and other 
mouldings of pithas of various kinds are given in detail. With regard 
to their shape, the fithas, like the phalli (and, in fact, all other archi- 
tectural and sculptural objects), are divided into three types, nagara, 
dravida, and vesara. The pithas of the nagara class are said to be square, 
those of the drdavida type are octagonal, and the vesara ones are 
round (vyttta). 


CHAPTER LIV 
Tue Femare Derries (Sakti-lakshana-vidhana) 


The following female deities are specially described : Sarasvati, 
the goddess of learning ; Savitri ; Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth or 
fortune; Mahi, the Earth-goddess ; Manonmani, the goddess of love ; 
Durga ; and the Seven Mothers (Sapta-matrt) collectively so called. 
Of these, Lakshmi is distinguished into Maha (great) Lakshmi, and 
Samanya (ordinary) Lakshmi, the latter being installed in all the 
family chapels. The Seven Mothers consist of Varahi, Kaumari, 
Chamundi, Bhairavi, Mahendri, Vaishnavi, and Brahmani. These 
seven goddesses are measured in the nava-tdla system, and all other 
female deities in the dasa-tala system. The details of these measure- 
ments are discussed in two separate chapters, wherein the com- 
parative measurements of the several parts of the various limbs of 
the body are given. It may be pointed out here that, according to the 
dasa-tala system, the whole length of the body is ten times the face, 
while in the nava-tdla, it is nine times, and hence in the ashta-tala it 
should be eight times the face, and so forth. 

The characteristic attributes and poses, and the ornaments, decora- 
tions, etc., of each of these female deities are described in detail. 

The goddess Sarasvati is represented as seated on a lotus-seat. 
Her complexion is white like crystal. She is four-armed ; in her two 
right hands she holds a samdarfa! and a rosary (aksha-mala), and 
in her two left hands a book (pustaka) and a water-pot (kundika). 
There exists, however, also a two-handed variety of the Sarasvati 
image. Her ornaments, which are described in detail, include ear- 
pendants of the type called graha-kundala (makara-kundala). 


1 1 Should we read it ddarsa (mirror) ? The regular attribute of Sovaevatk however, 
is the lute (vind). 


142 


| 
/ 
' 


INDIA AND ABROAD MANASARA 


Savitri, who is seated on a lotus-seat to the left of Brahma, may 
be pink (white red, fveta-rakta) or dark blue (syama). She has two 
arms and two eyes, in other words she assumes a purely human 
shape. She holds a blue lotus flower (wtpala) in her right hand, while 
her left hand is stretched out in the pose of granting a boon (vara). 
Savitri, too, is adorned with various ornaments. 

Lakshmi, the goddess of good fortune, looks benign (prasanna- 
vadand) ; her complexion is pure gold. She has four arms. Her upper 
right hand is raised in the attitude of granting security (abhaya), and 
in her other right hand she holds either a red lotus flower (fadma) 
or a rosary. The attributes held in her left hands are a tabor or 
hand-drum (dindima) and a blue or red lotus flower. As befits the 
goddess of luck, she is bedecked with gorgeous ornaments and jewels. 

In contradistinction with the Great Lakshmi (Maha-Lakshmi) 
thus described, the ordinary Lakshmi is said to have only two 
hands in each of which she holds a red lotus flower (rakta-padma). 
Her distinguishing feature is that she is placed between two elephants 
with uplifted trunks. A brief account is given about representations 
of Lakshmi as the spouse of Vishnu. 

The Earth-goddess (Mahi-Sakti), who is placed on the other 
side of Vishnu, is said to be two-armed and two-eyed. In her right 
hand she holds a blue lotus (uépala) ; with her left hand she indicates 
the granting of a gift. She has a dark blue (syadma) complexion and 
wears makara ear-rings. 

Durga, also called Gauri and Parvati, the consort of Siva, is 
two-armed. She holds a blue lotus in her right hand and her left 
hand is in the pose of granting a gift (vara). She is distinguished by 
all the marks of female beauty and is profusely adorned with orna- 
ments. She has a dark blue (fama) complexion and wears yellow 
garments. She is placed to the left of Siva, or of his symbol, the 
linga. 

‘Manonmani(?), the goddess of love, is four-armed and three-eyed. 
Strange to say, her hair-dress is said to be the matted hair (jata) of 
an ascetic. Two of her hands are in the attitude of assuming pro- 
tection (abhaya) and of granting a boon (vara). In each of the two 
other hands she holds a lotus flower. Her complexion is pink (red 
white, sveta-rakta) or dark blue (syama). It appears that this Saktz 
also is reckoned as belonging to the retinue of Siva, in whose temple 
she is worshipped. 


143 


§mLPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


Finally, the Seven Mothers are described. In general these 
Saktis have the same emblems and distinguishing features as their 
male counterparts. Brahmani and Rudrani, for instance, who are 
the Saktis of Brahma and Rudra (or Siva) respectively wear the 
matted hair of the ascetics. Brahmani has four faces and four hands, 
in two of which she holds a rosary (aksha-mala) and a water-pot 
(kundika). Rudrani has a white complexion, her attributes are the 
antelope (harina) and the noose (pasa). Vaishnavi and Varahi, who 
are both Saktis of Vishnu, are distinguished by a dark blue (Syama) 
complexion and hold the discus (chakra) and conch-shell (Sankha) 
which are the well-known emblems of Vishnu. Varahi has a boar’s 
head. 

The chapter closes with a very brief reference to the plumb- 
lines which are more fully treated in a separate chapter. 


CHAPTER LV 
Tue Jain Imaces (Jaina-lakshana-vidhana) 


The opening lines describe in detail the various kinds of measure- 
ments used in Indian sculpture. 

The linear measurement is divided into six kinds, mana, pramana, 
parimana, lamba-mdna, unmana, and upamana. 

The measurement from the foot to the top of the head is called 
mana, which is in fact nothing but height. Pramana is the measurement 
of breadth (vistdra) ; parimdna is the measurement of girth or cir- 
cumference (paritah) ; lamba-mdna is the measurement along the 
plumb-line or the line drawn perpendicularly through the different 
parts of the body, the mana or the measurement of the height being 
determined by the surface of the body; unmdna is the measurement. 
of thickness (nimna) or diameter; and upamdna is the measurement 
of interspace (antara), such as that between the two feet of an image ; 
this measurement is evidently taken from one plumb-line to another. 

The primary measurement (ddi-mdna) refers to comparative 
measurement and is divided into nine kinds. The height of an image 
is determined firstly, by comparing it with the breadth (tara) of the 
whole temple (tarmya) ; secondly, with the height of the cella or 
sanctum (garbha-griha) ; thirdly, with the height of the door (dvara- 
mana) ; fourthly, with the measurement of the base (adhishthana) ; 
fifthly, by expressing it in cubit (hasta) ; sixthly, in the tala system ; 


114 


INDIA AND ABROAD MANASARA 


seventhly, in angulas; eighthly, by comparing it with the height of 
the worshipper; and ninthly, with the height of the riding-animal 
(vahana) or with the height of the principal idol (mila-bera). 

Absolute measurement in cubits (hasta), etc. is given in the case 
of many architectural and sculptural objects. 

The azgula (lit. finger) measurement has reference to both 
comparative and absolute measurements. Three kinds of azgulas 
are expressly distinguished, and a fourth a7gula is added later. 

(a) The berdigula is the measurement taken by the avgula or 
finger of the main idol. 

(6) The manangula refers to the ordinary absolute measurement 
in atigulas, one angula being equal to eight yavas (barley grains) or 
three-quarters of an English inch. 

(c) The mdatragula is the measurement determined by the length of 
the digit and the width of the middle finger in the right hand of 
the master (kartr?). 

(d) Another kind of aigula measurement is determined by divid- 
ing the whole length of the body of an image into a number of 
equal parts, each of which is called a deha-labdhangula or simply 
dehangula. In the last sense, angula is used to mean simply a part. 
Thus both azgula and part (amsa, mdatra) are indiscriminately used 
throughout the work. If the length, etc., of a building or image is 
divided into a number of equal parts for some special purpose, each 
of them is called azgula, ama, or maira indiscriminately. This lack 
of discrimination has been very confusing in many places, rendering 
it extremely hard to distinguish an absolute measurement from a 
comparative one. bh eae 

The height of the image is determined by comparing it with the 
height of the worshipper (yajamana). It may be of nine kinds, accord- 
ing as it extends from the foot of the worshipper to his sex-organ, 
navel, heart, breast, arms, chin, tip of the nose, hair limit (on the 
forehead), or to his full height. The éalamana admits of many varie- 
ties; the ten-tdla measurements vary from one dala to ten tala ; each 
of these is again divided into three types, the uttama or the largest, 
the madhyama or the intermediate, and the adhama or the smallest. 
Thus an image is of the daga-tala measurement when its whole length, 
is equal to ten times the face. In the largest type of the dasa-tala 
system, the whole length is divided into 124 equal parts, which are 


proportionately distributed over the different limbs of the body ; in 
145 j 


§ILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE Iy 


the intermediate type, the whole length is divided into reo equal 
parts and in the smallest type, into 116 equal parts. In the nava-talg 
system, the whole length would be nine times: the face 3. ithe 
ashta-tala,. éight times; and so forth. Several of these tala measures © 
are described in detail, in the subsequent chapters. eee 

The varieties ‘of: the alternative measurements.in’ each’ case’ are 
simplified by thé application of the rules of dyadi-shad-varga. 

The ‘main object of the chapter, namely, the description of the ‘ 
Jain deities, is:‘thus submerged in a lengthy discussion of the various. «= 
measurements used both in architecture and sculpture. aa 

Like all other idols, the images of Jain deities, too, may .be : 
stationary or movable ; they may be in the erect or in the sitting pos- 
ture. They have a purely human shape, and wear neither robes nor’ 
ornaments. On the chest the srivatsa symbol is marked in gold. They 
are placed on a throne decorated with the makara-torana, and the 
ornamental tree (halpa-vriksha), and are attended by Narada and 
other sages, by Yakshas, Vidyadharas, Siddhas, Nagendras, and 
Lokapalas, etc. All these attendants, it should be observed, are also 
known as Hindu deities. ; ER 

The twenty-four Tirthankaras, or Jain saints, are referred to but % 
not specified. 


CHAPTER LVI 
Tue Buppuist IMaceEs (Bauddha-lakshana-vidhana) - 


The account of these images, too, is very meagre. Evidently the 
author had in mind solely the effigies of Buddha, not of other Buddhist 
deities. This is clear from his description. These figures, he says, 
which may be either erect or in the sitting posture, are placed on a 
throne (simhdsana), and are distinguished by the afvattha (holy fig) 
tree as well as by the kalpa-vriksha (mythic wonder-tree). The latter, | 
as we have seen, is represented in connexion with other divine beings 
as well, but the afvattha or ficus religiosa is characteristic of Buddha, 
as the Bodhi-tree, under which he attained enlightenment (bodht), 
belongs to that species. Another peculiar mark of Buddha, which 


* Cf. James Burgass, Digambara Jaina Iconography, Indian Antiquary, Vol. XXXII, 
PP: 459 sqq-, for the full list of the Jain Saints 3 See also the writer’s Encyclopaedia 
of Indian Architecture. 


146 


z 
vas 
= 
E 
a 
~~ 
= : 
A 


aa 
| Ca 


Lea bay uesraves 

ee SES Oe ee 

hide ¥ erties. , 
yi here + he 


Carvincs AT AMARAVATI STUPA 


PLATE XX XIV(a) 


Page 146 


SCULPTURES OF AMARAVATI STOPA 


Tat ~ 
SS AIL, ESE FREES 


cate) 
4 


ie at} gh weenanenyre suse: 7 NLP NHOSM USHA \7% Vous: bY gh | (yo AL AYE Ya | 


PLATE XXXIV(b) 


Page 147 


INDIA AND ABROAD MANASARA 


has been duly noted by the author, is the ushpisha or protuberance 
of the skull (ushnishojjvala-maulika). For the rest, the appearance of 
Buddha is purely human. He has a full face, a long nose, smiling 
eyes and elongated ears. His body is fleshy, his chest broad, his 
belly round, and his arms long. He wears a yellow garment 
(pitambara-dhara), and his complexion is white. Like other idols, the 
Buddha images are made of wood, stone, or iron (Joha). They are 
measured according to the largest type of the dafa-tala system. 


CHAPTER LVII 


Imaczs or Sacus (Muni-lakshana-vidhana) 


The seven well-known patriarchs or sages (rishi or muni) are taken 
to illustrate the three varieties of the tala measurement. They are 
Agastya, Kasyapa, Bhrigu, Vasishtha, Bhargava, Visvamitra, and 
Bharadvaja. j 

Agastya is bright blue (sydma) in colour ; Kasyapa, yellow (fita) ; 
Bhrigu, dark or black (krishna) ; Vasishtha, red (rakta) ; Bhargava, 
brownish (piigala) ; Visvamitra, red (rakta) ; and Bharadvaja, yellow 
(haridra, lit. turmeric-coloured). They are represented in a purely 
human shape, being two-armed and two-eyed; they wear yellow 
garments and the sacred thread (yajfa-sitra), and are distinguished 
by the matted hair of the ascetics (jatajita). In their two hands 
they hold a staff (danda) and a book (fustaka). Of Agastya, who 
is mentioned first among the seven sages, it is stated particularly 
that he is corpulent (brihatkukshi) and hump-backed (kubjakara). 

Of these seven sages, Agastya is measued in the seven-idla, 
Kasyapa and -Bhrigu in the eight-tdla, and the rest in the nine- 
tala. The details of these three ‘ala measurements are given subse- 
quently. 

In the sapta- or seven-tala measurement, the whole length of the 
image is seven times the height of the face, which is generally twelve 
angulas (9 inches) in the Indian system. This length is divided into 
12 X 7 =84 equal parts, of which the proportional distribution among 
the different limbs is explained at great length. 


1The urnd, or mark between the brows, which is another distinguishing feature 
of Buddha, is not noticed in the course of this description. 


sed 


§ILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


In the ashta- or eight-iala system, the whole. length is similarly 
divided into 96 equal parts, and in the nine-édla into 108 equal parts. 


CHAPTER LVIUI 
IMAGES or YAxsHas, VipyADHARAS, ETC, (Yaksha-vidyadhara-vidhana) 


The present chapter deals briefly with four classes of semi-divine 
beings, namely, Yakshas, Vidyddharas, Gandharvas, and Kinnaras. 
They are said to have two arms and two eyes, in other words, they 
assume a purely human appearance. They are adorned with the 
crown known by the name of karanda. The colour of the Yakshas is 
stated to be dark blue (syama) and yellow (ita), that of the Vidya- 
dharas dark red (yaéma-rakta) and yellow. The images, both of the 
Yakshas and the Vidyadharas, are measured according to the nava-tala 
system. The Yakshas are distinguished from the Rakshasas, the latter 
being evil spirits, while the former are regarded as supernatural beings 
of a benevolent and inoffensive disposition. The Yakshas act as atten- 
dants: (anuchara) and chowry-bearers of the gods. The Vidyadharas 
are a kind of fairies possessed of magical powers. Here, apparently, 
they are described as Aflantes. The Gandharvas are celestial choirs, 
and celebrated as musicians. 

The description of the Kinnaras is contained in a Malini stanza 
at the end of the chapter: ‘ The legs are like those of an animal, 
the upper part of the body is like that of a man, the face is like that 
of Garuda (the bird of Vishnu), and the arms are provided with 
wings. ‘He is adorned with a diadem and a red lotus, has the beauti- 
ful hue of a flower, and holds a lute (vind). These are the character- 
istic features of the Kinnara.1 


CHAPTER LIX 
Imacrs or Devoruxs (Bhakta-lakshana-vidhana) 


Devotees are divided into four classes according to the four stages 
of holiness and are called salokya, samipya, sariipya, and sdyujya.” 


1Jt may be noticed that the body of the Kinnara is a combination of the bodies 
of a man, an animal, and a bird. 

* The salokyddi-chatushtaya is also mentioned in the Bhagavata-purana, IX, 4, 67. 
The literal meaning of the four terms in question is : dwelling in the same world 
(viz. as the deity), dwelling in the vicinity (of the deity), being in conformity 
with (the deity), and being united with (the deity), 


148 


PLATE XXXV 


La) Reet 


= 


Me 


Cage 


St By 


Page 148 


CEILING AND SUPPORTING IMAGES 


RAmESVARAM TEMPLE SHOWING CORRIDOR, 


INTERIOR VIEW OF 


PLATE XXXVI 


Le 


~—— SCOR Ti rg 


— 
ue 


* Boog 
r 
r 


~ 
$ 
44 


GOInt--s 


Page 1A0 


A 
A 


VAJRASANA AT 


BopuGay. 


aang, 


INDIA AND ABROAD MANASARA 


| Sdlokya is the result of devotion (bhakti), knowledge (jana), and renun- 
i .  Clation (vairagya). Knowledge combined with renunciation leads to 
| | sdmipya. Sariipya is produced in the worshipper by meditation alone, 
and sayujya is attained by the true knowledge (of God). 

| The images of the sdlokya class of worshippers are measured in 
i the largest type of the nava-tala system, in which the whole length 
\ is divided into 112 equal parts. Those of the samipya class are 
measured in the smallest type of the daga-tdla system, in which the 
'/.4 whole length is divided into 116 equal parts. Those of the sdripya 
_ Class are measured in the intermediate type of the dafa-tala system, 
| _ ‘sin which the whole length is divided into 120 equal parts. And the 
7. . figures of the sdayujya class are measured in the largest type of the 
| dasa-tala system, in which the whole length is divided into 124 equal 
parts. 

The first two systems, namely, the largest type of the nava-tala 
| and the smallest type of the dasa-tala, are minutely described in this 
. chapter. The other two systems, that is, the intermediate and the 
| > largest types of the dasa-tala, are treated subsequently in two separate 
chapters. 


ig CHAPTER LX 
Ripinc ANIMALS OF THE Gops: THE GoosE 


(Vahana-vidhine Hamsa-lakshana) 


The chapter opens with the announcement that the vdahanas 
of the Triad (Zrimirti) will now be described. But only one of them, 
namely, the Goose (hamsa), is described in this chapter, the other 
three, the Garuda, the Bull, and the Lion being described in the 
next three chapters. In these four chapters, the term vdhana is used 
to designate the various animals and birds used by the gods and 
goddesses for riding. 
| The goose is the vdhana of Brahma. The limbs of the goose are 
said to be measured in the largest type of the dvi-tala system. The 
details of this system are described minutely. The goose is white 
all over, with red legs and golden beak. 
The chapter closes with the statement that rows of geese should 
be beautifully carved or painted in the temples of the gods and in the 


149 


— - yY anes - — Dee — 


§ILPA-~SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


mansions of Brahmans and kings; they are figured on the entabla- 
ture (prastara), on the upper part of the utara, on the kita, nida, and 
griod (neck). 
CHAPTER LXI 
Tur Garupa (Garuda-lakshana-vidhana)* 


The chapter opens with a lengthy discussion on the application 
of the rules of dyddi-shad-varga, in order to reconcile various com- 
parative measurements suggested for the Garuda and other riding 
animals of the gods. 

Garuda is the vdhana of Vishnu. His limbs are measured in the 
nava-tala system, the details of which are given in a previous chapter. 
He is figured in an erect or sitting posture, and as meditating on 
Vishnu with joined palms. The arrangement of his various limbs 
and their colour, etc., are described at great length. The Garuda 
is figured partly as a human creature and partly as a bird. He is 
provided with feathers, with wings painted in five colours, and with 
a beak (iwnda) ; but, on the other hand, the description refers to his 
arms (prakoshtha), his ears, and hair (kefa). He wears various orna- 
ments (sarvdlankdra-samyukta), including a diadem of the kind called 
karanda (lit. a baskét), and is gorgeously painted in a great variety 
of colours. He is described as being of a terrific appearance (ugradyis). 
His worship is stated to be conducive to the destruction of the 
enemy (Satru-ndsa). 

CHAPTER LXIi 


Tue Buty (Vrishabha-lakshana-vidhana) 


The bull, Nandin,? is the animal of Siva. Its image, which may be 
either recumbent or erect, is placed facing the Siva temple on 


1The Garuda is a mythical bird, the sovereign of the feathered tribes and the 
enemy of the serpent (Vaga) race. There is a tradition that Garuda is the son of 
Kasyapa and Vinata. Hence the metronymic Vainateya, by which he is often 
designated. The myth of the birth of Garuda is told in the Mahabharata, Adi-parva, 
Chapter XVI. 

a The image of the bull Nandin is regularly found in front of temples dedicated 
to Siva. A well-known example is the colossal recumbent bull, placed opposite 
to the famous vimana of Tanjore. It is hewn out of one block of black granite and 
measures 16 feet in length and 13 feet in height. A remarkable bronze Nandin, 
which is found at Brahmor (Chamba) in the Western Himalaya and which, on 
the evidence of an inscription, may be assigned to the seventh century A-D., is 


illustrated in the Antiquities of Chamba State (A } ja, New Imp. 
eg cen Pant re ay ee See of nde, Nowe 


150 


INDIA AND ABROAD MANASARA 
pedestal (pitha), either inside the shrine, or in a pavilion (mandapa) 
in front of the temple, or at the door. It is not measured in any 
tala system. Various absolute and comparative measurements are 
prescribed. Its height, for instance, may be equal to the height of 
the idol (of Siva), or up to its ears or arms, or the height may be from 
one cubit to nine cubits, or equal to three-fourths or one-half of the 
height of the door of the temple. The bull Nandin is made either 
solid or hollow, of iron (Jauhaja), stone, wood, dbhdsa (glass), ratna 
(precious stone), sudhd (stucco), terra-cotta, and Sarkar (grit). 

The description and measurements of the various limbs of the 
bull are given in great detail. From the description it would appear 
that the bull of Siva is white in colour except the four legs, the hoofs, 
and the ears, which are red. He is covered with a tiger skin and 
wears not only garlands round the neck but even foot-rings or anklets 
(nipura). 

CHAPTER LXIII 


Tue Lion (Simha-lakshana-vidhana) 


The lion is the last of the four divine vdhanas, to which a chapter 
is devoted.? 

As in the case of the bull, the image of the lion is not measured 
in any tala system. The absolute measurements of the various parts 
of the lion, expressed in azgulas, are enumerated. The lion is made 
in an erect, sitting, or recumbent posture. His tail is generally equal 
to his height. His four legs are like those of the tiger. His colour is 
white, but his mane should be red. The shape of his nails and teeth 
is compared to that of the crescent (bdla-chandra, ardha-chandra). 


CHAPTER LXIV 


Tue Imace (Pratimda-vidhana) 


This chapter, which is missing in all the manuscripts but one, 
opens with the announcement that herein will briefly be described 


1 snning of the chapter (and again in the concluding verse) the lion 
is jee tas ‘ the riding ae of the gods’ (devanam vahana). It a 
however, well known that the lion (or the tiger) is more particularly be anima 
of Parvati the consort of Siva. It is hardly necessary to point out that of the other 
deities both male and female, each, as a rule, has his or her own vahana, oe 
Karttike a, the peacock ; Ganeféa, the mouse ; Indra, the elephant ; Yama, e 
buffalo eave a chariot drawn by seven horses ; Varuna, a crocodile (makara) ; 
Kubera, a man (whence his epithet nara-vahana), etc. 


151 


ér.PA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE In 


the measurements from head to foot of the sixteen attendant deities 
of the Vishnu temple. It will be remembered that in Chapter 
XXXII on ‘attendant deities’ (Parivara-vidhana), groups of eight, 
ten, sixteen, and thirty-two deities have been mentioned, who are 
stated to occupy subsidiary shrines in the compound of a large Vishnu 
temple. 

But the contents of the chapter, in reality, do not expressly des- 
cribe any of the groups of deities in question. The first part deals 
with the various kinds of comparative mea urements already dis- 
cussed at the beginning of Chapter LV on the Jain deities. The 
second part elaborately describes the rules of the dyadi-shad-varga, 
which have been repeatedly mentioned whenever a variety of measure- 
ments was suggested for any particular object. 

The comparative measurement is distinguished into twelve kinds, 
according as it is compared with the phallus, the main Vishnu image, 
the width of the sanctum (garbha-griha), the breadth of the main temple 
(harmya, prasada), the door, flagstaff (vamsa), basement, pillar ; or is 
based on cubit (hasta) measurement, iala-measurement, the measure-: 
ment of the worshipper, and azigula measurement. 

The angula is further distinguished, as already pointed out, into. 
three kinds ; namely, litigangula or berdngula ; the mandngula, viz. angula 


of eight yavas or three-quarters of an inch, and the dehalabdha-angula, . - 


viz. one of the equal parts into which the whole length of an image 
is divided. The measurement obtained from a comparison with the 
height of the main idol or the worshipper is of nine kinds, as it may 
reach the full length (of the idol or the worshipper), his eyes, nostrils, 
chin, arms, breast, heart, navel, and sex organ. 

Other measurements obtained from a comparison with the phallus, 
and various parts of the temple, such as the door, the pillar, etc., 
admit of many varieties and proportions. 


CHAPTER LXV 
Tue Larcusr TypE oF THE DASA-TALA MEASUREMENT 
(Uttama-dasa-téla-vidhana) 


In this system the whole length of an image is divided into 124 
equal parts, which are proportionately distributed over the different 
parts of the body from head to foot. The measurement of breadth, 


152 


INDIA AND ABROAD wane 
etc., of the various limbs is not included in these 124 parts. The 
measurement of the hand, etc., is also excluded. All the ninneree 
parts of the body are minutely described. Such minute measurement 
as that of the finger-digit, the interspace between two toes, etc., has 
not escaped the notice of the author of the Manasara. i abe 


CHAPTER LXVI 
Tue INTERMEDIATE TyPE oF THE DaSa-TALA MEASUREMENT 
(Madhyama-daSa-tala-vidhana) 


The female deities of the higher order are generally measured in 
this system. The whole height of the image is divided into 120 equal 
parts, which are proportionately distributed over the various parts of 
the hody from head to foot. The details are minutely described. 

The face is taken as the standard of the ‘dla measurement, and 
is generally twelve a/gulas, or about nine inches, in length. The face 
is stated to be of oval shape (kukkutdnda-samakara, lit. shaped like 


the egg of a hen). The eyebrow is shaped like the bow (chapakara), 


the eyes like a fish (matsyakara), the nose like the sesame flower 
(tilapushpakritt), and the nostrils (puta) like a bean (nishpava-bya). 
According to both Indian and European canons, a well propor- 
tioned male human figure is equal to eight times (ashta-tala). the 
length of the face, and a female human figure is seven and a half 
times the length of the face. “The other rules arrived at by the 
Indian artist do not appear to be divergent from those evolved by the 
European artist, and if in Indian sculpture the results are not good 
in some instances, it is the fault of the artist and not attributable 


to the guide book.’+ 
CHAPTER LXVII 


Tur PLUMB-LINES (Pralamba-lakshana-vidhana) 


The plumb-lines, as has already been pointed out, are lines drawn 
through the body of an image in order to find out accurately the 
perpendicular and the horizontal measurements of the different parts 
of the body. 

This is done by means of an instrumen 
which is a square plank of four, three, tw0, 


t called pralamba-phalaka, 
or one azgula in thickness, 


1'T, A, Gopinath Rao, Elements of Hindu Iconography ; see p. 156, and the writer's 


Encyclopaedia for further details under Talamana. 


153 


SILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


with the sides equal to three-fourths or one-half of the length of the 
image. Another plank of the same size is used as the stool on which 
the image is placed. The first mentioned plank (pralamba-phalaka) 
is fixed to the crown of the head of the image. The planks are kept 
parallel to each other. Holes are made in the upper plank, where- 
from are suspended strings at the other end of which are attached 
small balls of iron or stone. The number of holes and strings sus- 
pended from them, by which the plumb-lines are determined, varies 
from five to eleven, according to the different postures and poses of the 
image. The five principal plumb-lines consist of one drawn from the 
centre of the upper plank corresponding to the crown of the head, and 
four on the four sides of the body. Two other lines drawn adjoinins 
the right and left sides of the face make the number seven. Another 
two lines drawn on the right and left sides of the back of the head 
make the number nine, and two lines drawn from the two armpits 
make the total of the lines eleven. 

The line drawn from the crown of the head (fikha-mant, lit. crest 
jewel) passes by the diadem and the headdress, the middle of the 
forehead, the eyebrows, the nose, the chin, the neck, the chest 
(hridaya), the navel, the sex organ, the thighs, between the knees, 
the ankles (nalaka), the heels, the soles of the feet, and the two big 
toes. This is evidently drawn along the surface of the body in a 
perfectly erect or straight posture of the image. The other plumb- 
lines, too, touch different parts of the body; but they are not parti- 
cularly mentioned here. 

Very minutely are described the comparative and the absolute 
measurements of the perpendicular distance between different parts 
of the body by a plumb-line, as well as the horizontal distance from 
one line to another. The distance, say, between the two big toes, 
is said to be eight azgulas. The variation of these measurements in 
different postures and poses is carefully considered. 

The three postures of images, namely, erect or standing (sthdnaka), 


sitting (dsana), and recumbent (fayana), are frequently mentioned in 
the Manasara1 


_ 1 Each of these three, of course, admits of a variety. The sitting posture (dana) is 
in particular distinguished into various forms in Indian literature and sculpture, 
such as the padmasana, bhadrasana, vajrdsana, virasana, svastikasana, yogdsana, etc. 
In some books, even eighty-four postures are enumerated. These manners of sitting 
form part of the eight-fold observances of ascetics. 


154 


INDIA AND ABROAD MANASARA 


In the present chapter a special reference is made to the three 
bhangas or poses which are distinguished in Indian sculpture. They 
are known as sama-bhanga or equipoise, dbhaiga or a slight flexion, 
ati-bhanga or an excessive flexion, and tri-bhanga or of three flexions.1 


CHAPTER LXVIII 
Tue Firsr Castine or THE ImacEe (Madhichchhishta-vidhana) 


The chapter opens with an enumeration of the names of phalli 
and asceties (muni), as well as of architects,? but the subject proper 
is the casting of an image in wax (madhiichchhishta). The sthapati and 
the sthdpaka prepare the wax, but the manner of its preparation is 
not expressly described. All kinds of images, temporary or perma- 
nent, stationary or movable, are moulded in wax. The process 
appears to be this. Some part of the image is covered with a thin 
copper-leaf (taémra-patra) and the wax is laid on two or three angulas 
deep. Earth (mrittikd) is spread above the part covered with wax. 
The idol is heated after it has been besmeared. If the master likes, 
the smearing may be done with melted iron too. One-half of the 
image, which is not covered with earth, is washed in water. The 
process is repeated several times. If any of the minor limbs be lost 
through this process, the image should be furnished with it again 
after having been heated. But if the head or the middle of the body 
(madhyakadya) be damaged, the whole image should be changed. If 
the master does not approve of the image, it should be recast. The 
whole process in its different stages has to be attended by many 
ritualistic ceremonies. 

1The expression tri-bhanga (and #ri-bhangin) is applied to Krishna in his aspect 
of the divine cow-herd (Gopala) playing the reed-pipe. Cf. Hen onbekend Indisch 
tooneelstuk (Gopalakeli-chandrika). Tekst met inleiding door W. Calland, (Verhand. 
Kon. Akad. v. Wetensch, te Amsterdam N. R. Dl. XVII, No. 3. Amsterdam 
1917, p- 46, I. 1 (marakata-vibhangojjvala-tri-bhanganga-gopdlena) and p. 124, 132 
(iri-bhangin). ae a - te 

2 ix kinds of phalli (jyotir-linga) enumerated here are : Saiva, pasupata, kala- 
dude ae Fanta) and bhairava. Cf. above, where the fifth class is called 
vama The names of the munis are Agastya, KaSyapa, Bhrigu, Gautama, Bhargava, 
Galava (?Garga), etc., cf. above. The expert authorities on architecture are the 
following : Visvakarman, ViéveSa, Visvasara, Prabodhaka, Vrita, Maya, Tvashtri, 
Manu Nala Manavit, Manakalpa, Manasara, Prashtri, Manabodha, Visvabodha, 
Nava reeara Vigala, Visvakasyapa, Vastubodha, Mahatantra, Vastuvidyapati, 
Paradatiyaka, y Kalayipa, Chaitya, Chitraka, Avarya, Sadhakasara-samhita, 
Bhanu, Indra, Lokajria, and Saura. 


159 


SILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


In other texts the process of casting an image is much more clearly 
described : 

‘ If images have to be cast in metal, the wax must first be melted 
and poured (out of the mould) and all defects removed with cloth.’ 

‘If the images be required to be made of earth, rods (of metal 
or wood) must be (inserted in them), if of metal, they must first be 
prepared well in wax.”# 

‘If an image is to be made of metal, it must first be made of 
wax, and then coated with earth; gold and other metals are 
purified and cast into (the mould) and a complete image is thus 
obtained by capable workmen.’® 

‘In regard to bronze images,’ says Mr. Rao,* ‘it is believed 
by some that India could not have known the cire perdue method of 
making metal images earlier than about the tenth century a.D., and 
that India must have therefore borrowed it from Europe. That the 
art of casting metals in wax moulds is much earlier in India can be 
shewn in more ways than one.’ In support of his assertion, Mr. Rao 
cites the three above-mentioned quotations. 


CHAPTER LXIX 
Tue Drrects oF THE Limps (azga-dishana-vidhana) 


The chapter opens with the announcement that it will describe 
the evil consequences of a defective construction of buildings, which 
threaten the king, the kingdom, and the maker. It is laid down that 
no part of a building should be larger or smaller than what is pre- 
scribed. But nothing is further stated about the defects themselves. 
Nor are images separately mentioned. The penalties for defective 
construction are enumerated with regard to the different architec- 
tural members, such as doors, staircases, columns, walls, domes, 
spires, etc. Thus, it is stated that, if the altar (vedika@) be too small, 
the master will lose his eyesight ; if the pinnacle (stdpika) be too large 
or too small, the people will be afflicted with poverty ; if the columns 
be too large or too small, the family of the master will be extermin- 
ated, and so forth. 


1 Karandgama, Il, V, 41. 2 Suprabhedagama, XXXIV, 21. 
8 Vishnu-samhita, patala, 14. 4 Ibid, Elements of Hindu Iconography. 
156 


INDIA AND ABROAD MANASARA 


No such penalties, however, are mentioned for defects in sculptural 
objects. 


CHAPTER LXX 
Tue CHIsELLING OF THE Eye (Nayanonmilana-lakshana-vidhana) 


When the Indian sculptor has carved a divine image, the cere- 
mony of chiselling (dt. opening) the eyes of the idol is the final func- 
tion, by which it is, as it were, imparted with eyesight and rendered 
fit to be worshipped. The custom is quite ritualistic, although it 
is stated here that it should be carried out by the architect. The 
ceremonies consist in the worshipping of different deities, in per- 
forming the sacrifice with the holy fire, and in the ratna-fuddhi (Uit. 
purifying the jewel), etc. 

The setting of precious stones in the different parts of the phallus 
and in the images of the deities is also described in the present 
chapter. 

This last chapter of the work closes with the statement that this 
science of architecture and sculpture was originally described by 
Brahma, Indra, and all the other gods, and that the Manasara has 
been compiled on the basis of these authorities. 

It will be noticed that of the seventy chapters of the Manasara 
the first eight are introductory, the next forty-two deal with archi- 
tectural matters, and the last twenty are devoted to sculpture. In 
the introductory chapters full accounts are given of such preliminary 
- matters as the table of contents, the system of measurement, the neces- 
sary training and qualifications of the different classes of architects, 
the selection of site, testing of soil, planning, designing, dialling, 
finding out cardinal points, and astronomical and astrological calcula- 
tions. Next are given all the architectural details of various kinds 
of villages, towns, and forts; joinery, dimensions and foundations 
of buildings ; pillars and their component parts, such as pedestals, 
bases, shafts, and entablatures ; storeys varying from one to twelve 
in ordinary buildings and to seventeen in gate-houses ; the artistic 
arrangement of mansions in as many as ten rows ; compounds and 
courts of edifices, their gate-houses, their attached and detached build- 
ings, their compartments, halls and chambers, their doors, windows 
and the openings; the steps and staircases for buildings, hills and 


157 


§ILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


rivers, etc.; their courtyards, quadrangles, and arches ; royal courts, 
palaces, thrones, and crowns; cars, chariots, and other conveyances ; 
articles of furniture, such as bedsteads, couches, tables, chairs, ward- 
robes, baskets, cages, mills, lamps; dresses and garments ; and orna- 
ments, such as various chains, armlets, anklets, head-gear and foot- 
wear. In the concluding portion are given the sculptural details of 
idols of deities of the Hindus, the Buddhists, and the Jains, statues of 
great personages, and images of animals and birds. 

Thus it may be concluded that, as a standard work on architecture 
in the widest sense of the term, the Manasara is perfectly complete and 
methodical in all respects. 


INDIA AND ABROAD MAYAMATA 


THE Mayamata Sinpa-sAstRA 


The next well-known Silpa-Sastra is the Mayamata, attributed to 
one Gannamiacharya.! 

A detailed summary of this work is not necessary. The follow- 
ing list of thirty-six chapters, placed side by side with the similar 
chapters of the Manasara, will show that in respect of the titles of 
chapters, their sequence and contents, the Mayamata and the Mana- 
saya are identical? : 

(1) Samgrahadhydya—table of contents, Manasara, Chapter I. 

(2) Vastu-prakara—classification of architectural subjects, M.,° 
Vee 

(3) Bhi-pariksha—testing of soil, M., IV, V. 

(4) Bhi-parigraha—selection of soil, M., IV, V. 

(5) Mdnopakarana—materials and system of measurement, M., II. 

(6) Dik-parichchheda—on finding out cardinal points, M4., VI. 

(7) Pada-devata-vinydsa—site plans, M., VII. 

(8) Bali-karma-vidhana—offerings to gods, M., VIII. 

(9) Grama-vinydsa—villages, M., IX. 

(10) Nagara-vidhdéna—town-planning, M., X. 

(11) Bha-lamba-vidhéna—dimensions of storeys, M., XI. 

(12) Garbha-nydsa-vidhana—foundations, M., XII. 

(13) Upapitha-vidhana—pedestals, M., XIII. 

(14) Adhishthana-vidhana—hases, M., XIV. 

(15) Pada-pramdana-dravya-samgraha—columns, M., XV. 

(16) Prastara-prakarana—entablatures, M., XVI. 

(17) Sandhi-karma-vidhana—joinery, M Pp NAO: ; 

(18) Sikhara-karana-bhavana-samapti-vidhana—making the finials and 
finishing the building, @., XVIII. wi 

(19) Eka-bhimi-vidhana—one-storeyed buildings, M., XIX. 

(20) Dvi-bhimi-vidhana—two-storeyed buildings, M., XX. 


1 Oriental Manuscripts Library, Madras, Catalogue, Vol. XXII, no. 13038, 
also 13034-13039. ’ ; n 
Cf. the colophon Sfa wararart factaarai a) aeaat Arete 


2 The edition of the Mayamata by M. M. Ganapati Sastri contains only the first 
thirty-four chapters. Besides, it does not seem to have made use of the manuscripts 
mentioned elsewhere. But there is reference to three other manuscripts in this 


gee Manasara has Manopakarana for Chapter II, which is placed in Chapter 


V of the Mayamata. 
159 


SIL PA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


(21) Tri-bhimi-vidhana—three-storeyed buildings, M., XXI, 

(22) Bahu-bhimi-vidhanat—buildings of more than three storeys, 
M., XXTI—XXX. 

(23) Prakdra-parivéra—courts, and temples therein of the attend- 
ant deities; in the Manasdra these two subjects are treated in. two 
chapters, XX XI, XXXII. 

(24) Gopura-vidhana—gate-houses, M., XXXIII. 

(25) Mandapa-vidhadna—pavilions, M., XXXIV. 

(26) Sald-vidhana—storeyed mansions, M., XXXV. 

(27) Griha-manadhikara®—(location and) measurement of houses, 
M., XXXVI. 

(28) Grtha-pravesa—first entry into a newly built house (opening 
or house-warming ceremony), M., XX XVII. 

(29) Raja-vefma-vidhana—toyal palaces, M., XL. 

(30) Dodra-vidhana—doors; in the Manaséra this subject is 
described in two chapters, XXXVIII, XXXIX. 

(31) Yanddhikara—conveyances, M., II, XLIII. 

(32) Yana-Sayanadhikadra—cars and chariots, couches and bed- 
steads, M., XLIV, XLV. 

Sculptural subjects are abridged in only four chapters : 

(33) Linga-lakshana—the phallus, M., LII. 

(34) Pztha-lakshana—altars and pedestal of the phallus, M@., LIII. 

(35) Anukarma-vidhéna—minor works on sculpture, M., LI, LIV, 
LV, LXIII, LXV, LXX. 

(36) Pratima-lakshana—images in general, M., LXIV. 

It should be noticed that in respect of the titles of chapters, 
their sequence, except in one instance, contents, and method of treat- 
ment, the Mayamata runs exactly like the Manasara, step by step. It is 
hardly necessary to point out that in Chapter XXII of the former, 
the Chapters XXII—XXX of the latter are abridged, to the great . 
relief of readers. So also Chapter XXX of the former is an abridgment . 
of Chapters XX XVIII, XXXIX of the latter. Chapters XLI (royal 
courts) and XLII (characteristics of kings) of the Manasara, which 
have only an indirect use in an architectural treatise, have been 
prudently omitted in the Mayamata. Chapters XLV to L of the 
Manasara which deal respectively with thrones, arches, theatres, 


1Cf. Sastri, ibid, where Chatur-bhiimyadi is added at the beginning. 
2 Cf. Sastri, ibid, where it is read chatur-griha-vidhana, 


160 


INDIA AND ABROAD MAYAMATA 


ornamental trees, crowns, ornaments, and articles of house furni- 
ture, are left out in the Mayamata, apparently as matters of detail. 

Sculpture is said to be the hand-maid of architecture. This 
statement, in its restricted sense, is however appropriate only to reli- 
gious architecture, that is, temple-building. But in a treatise which is 
concerned with all sorts of buildings—religious, residential, military 
—undue space and preference for sculpture have been economically 
avoided in the Mayamata. In this treatise, as has already been pointed 
out, sculpture dealing with the phalli, altars, images and minor 
matters, is described in four chapters, while in the Manasara nearly 
two-thirds of the whole book, comprising twenty chapters, is given 
to these subjects ; and in the Arnsumad-bheda of Kasyapa, to be dis- 
cussed presently, which is avowedly a sculptural treatise, nearly half 
the space, comprising Chapters XLVI to LXXXIV, is devoted to 
matters of sculptural detail. 

It does not, therefore, seem unreasonable to suppose that in the 
compilation of the treatise named Mayamata, whether by Gannama- 
charya, as stated in the colophon (of MS. no. 13038, Oriental Manus- 
cripts Library, Madras, Catalogue, Volume XXII, page 8763) or 
by somebody else, the Manasdara has been largely drawn upon. 

In consideration of the fact that with the Mayamata (MS. no. 13037, 
fol. 213a), the Manasara (la) has become mixed, I am further led to 
believe that the manuscript of the A¢ayamaia in the Madras Orienta] 
Library seems to be an abridgment of the Manasara. 

The fact that one Mayamata is included in the list of thirty-two 
authorities mentioned in the Mdnasara itself does not present much 
difficulty in accepting this view. Mayamata, like Manu (or Manasara) 
-is apparently a generic name, and the treatise catalogued under 
the title Mayamata-vastu-Sastra need not necessarily be ascribed to the 
authority mentioned in the Manasara. 


161 k 


§ILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE Iv 


THe AMSUMAD-BHEDA oF KAéyapa 


This is another well-known treatise on architecture and about 
the next largest in size to the Manasdra. There is also a striking 
similarity of the Amsumad-bheda with the Manasara as will be shown 
by the following list : 

(1) Karshana—ploughing of the selected site, Manasara, Chap- 
ter V. 

(2) Prdsdda-vdstu—classification of buildings, M., ITI. 

(3) Vastu-homa—sacrificial offerings to the presiding deity of the 
site, M., VIII. 

(4) Prathameshtaka-vidhi—laying the foundations, M. XII (last 
portion). 

(5) Upapitha-vidhana—pedestals, M., XIII. 

(6) Adhishthana-vidhi—bases, M., XIV. 

(7) Nala-lakshana—canals ; in the Manasara this subject is referred 
to in several places, e.g., Chapter XIX, L, LII, LXVI. 

(8) Stambha-lakshana—columns, M., XV. 

(9) Phalaka-lakshana—planks, M., LXVII. 

(10) Vedika-lakshana—platforms, railings; in the Mdnasdra this is 
described in many places, Chapter IX, XV, XIX. XXII, etc. 

(11) falaka-lakshana—perforated windows, M., XX XIII (conclud- 
ing portion). 

(12) Torana-lakshana—arches, M., XLVI. 

(13) Vritta-sphutita-lakshana—in the Manasdara this is not described 
in a separate chapter. 

(14) Stambha-torana-vidhi—arches upon columns, M., XII. 

(15) Kumbha-tala-lakshana—capitals of columns; this also in the 
Manasara is referred to in many places, largely in Chapter XV. 

(16) Vritta-sphutita-lakshana—same as Chapter XIII. 

(17) Doara-lakshana—doors, M., XXXVIII, XXXIX. 

(18) Kampa-dodra-lakshana—a special door, M., XXXVIII, 
XXXIX. 


(19) Prastara-lakshana—entablatures, M., XVI. 

(20) Gala-vidhana—necks ; this is also referred to in many chapters 
in the Manasara, e.g., Chapter XVIII, XIX-XXX, etc. 

(21) Sikhara-lakshana—tops, finials; in the Manasdra this also is 
referred to in many places, e.g., Chapter XVIII, XIX, etc. 

(22) Nasikd—noses, wings; in the Manasara this is described in 
several places, e.g., Chapter XVI, XVII, XIX, L, etc. 


162 


INDIA AND ABROAD AMSUMAD-BHEDA 


(23) Manopakarana—system of measurement, M., IT. 

(24) Mana-sitradi-lakshana—measuring strings, M., II. 

(25) Nagardadi-vidhi—towns, etc., M., X. 

(26) Garbha-nyasa-vidhi—foundations, etc. le 

(27) Eka-tala-vidhéna—one-storeyed buildings, M., XTX. 

(28-30) Dvi-chaturtha-tala-vidhéna—two- to four-storeyed buildings, 
M., XX-XXII. 

(31) Katdadi-lakshana—finials ; in the Manasara referred to in many 
places, e.g., Chapter XV, XIX-XXX, LX, LXX, etc. 

(32-39)  Patcha-bhdnu-bhimi-vidhana—five- to twelve-storeyed 
buildings, M., XXIII-XXX. ; 

(40) Trayodasa-tala-vidhana—thirteen-storeyed buildings, and 

(41) Shodasa-bhitmi-vidhana—sixteen-storeyed buildings, subjects of 
these two chapters (XL, XLI) are dealt with in M., XXXII 

(42) Murdheshtaka-vidhithe brick at the top; in the Manasara 
referred to in many places, e.g., XVIII, etc. 

(43) Prakdra-lakshana—courts, M., XXXI. 

(44) Manta(-da)pa-lakshana—pavilions, M., XXXIV. 

(45) Gopura-lakshana—gate-houses, M., XX XIII. 

The remaining portion of this treatise, except the last two chapters 
on villages, deals with sculpture more elaborately than in the Mana- 
sara. It will be noticed that the purely architectural topics are more 
exhaustively described in the Manasara. 

(46) Sapta-mairika-lakshana—the seven mothers (female, images), 
M., LXIV. 

(47) Vindyaka-lakshana—image of Vinayaka or Ganega ; not speci- 
fied in the Manasdara, but see Chapters LVII, XL1. 

(48) Parivdra-vidhi—images of attendant deities, M/., XXXII. 

(49) Linga-lakshanoddhara—unearthing the phallus, cf. M., LIT. 

(50) Uttama-dasa-tdla-purusha-mana—the largest type of ten-tala 
measure as applied to male deities, M., LXV. 

(51) Madhyama-dasa-tdla-purusha-mana—the intermediate type of the 
ten-i@la measure as applied to male deities, M., LX VI, LXI. 

(52) Uttama-nava-tala—the largest type of the nine-ta/a measure, 
M., LVII, LXI. ; 

(53) Madhyama-nava-tala—intermediate type of the nine-tala mea- 
sure, M., LVII, LXI. 

(54.) Adhama-nava-tala—the smallest type of the nine-tdla measure, 
M., LVII, LXI. 

163 


§ILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


(55) Ashta-tala—the eight-tala measure, M., LVII. 

(56) Sapta-tala—the seven-iala measure, M., LVII. 

(57) Pitha-lakshanoddhara—the altars and pedestal of the phallus, 
M., LIII. 

(58) Sakala-sthapana-vidhi—the installation of the images of Iévara 
and three other deities, 4., LI. 

2 Pee \ —posture of an image, M., LXVII. 

(61) Chandra-Sekhara-mirti-lakshana—the image of Chandra-éekhara 
(Siva), M@., LI. 

(62) Vrishabha-vahana-mirti-lakshana—the image of the bull, the 
riding animal of Siva, M., LXII. 

(63) Nritta-mirti-lakshana—the image of dancing (Siva), M., LI. 

(64) Gangadhara-mirti-lakshana—the image of the Ganges bearing 
Siva, M., LI. 

(65) Tripura-miurti-lakshana—the image of Siva in the pose of killing 
Tripura (demon), ., LI. 

(66) Kalydna-sundara-lakshana—the image of Kalyana-sundara, M., 
IDi 


(67) Ardha-narisvara-lakshana—the image of Siva combined with his 
consort Parvati, M., LI. 

(68) Gajaha-mirti-lakshana—the image of Siva as killer of demon 
Gaja, M., XXIX, XXXII, XXXIX, XLIII, L. 

(69) Pasupata-murti-lakshana—the image of Pagupata (Siva), M., 
LI. 


(70) Kankdla-mirti-lakshana—the image of a skeleton, M., not 
specified. 

(71) Haryardha-Hara-lakshana—the combined image of Vishnu and 
Siva, M., LI. 

(72) Bhikshatana-mirti-lakshana—the image of Siva in the pose of 
a beggar, cf, M. LII. 

(73) ChandeSanugraha, M., not specified. 

(74) Dakshina-mirti-lakshana—the image of Siva, M., LII. 

(75) Kalaha-mirti-lakshana—the image of Kalaha (Siva), M., LII. 

(76) Litigodbhava-lakshana—revelation of the phallus, M4., LIT. 

(77) Vrtksha-sa mgrahana—collection of wood, M., XV. 

(78) Sdla-lakshana—the pike, M., XVIII. 

(79) Sila-pani-lakshana—the image of Siilapani (Siva), M., LI. 

(80) Rajju-bandha-lakshana—binding of rope, M., LL SEL. 

164 


INDIA AND ABROAD AMSUMAD-BHEDA 


(81) Mrit-samskara-lakshana—the process of casting images in 
earth, 7., LXVIII. 

(82) Kalka-samskara-lakshana—preparation of mixtures. 

(83) Varna-sa mskara-lakshana—preparation of colours. 

(84) Varna-lepana-medhya-lakshana. 

The contents of Chapters LKXVIII-LXXXIV are referred to in 
several places in the Manasara. 

(85) Gramddi-lakshana ; 

(86) Grama-lakshana } villages, MBO OS 

In this treatise, architecture proper is treated in the first forty-five 
and the last two chapters. These forty-seven chapters are similar 
in many respects to the first fifty chapters of the Manasara. The 
Armsumad-bheda deals much more elaborately with sculptural objects 
in thirty-nine chapters in place of some twenty chapters of the Mana- 
sara. But purely architectural topics are more exhaustively described 
in the Mdanasdra, which seems in any case to have largely influenced 
the other work. 


GupecasrRAs HINDU ARCHITECTURE ry 


THE VISVAKARMA-SILPA 


The most popular treatise on architecture is naturally the one attri. 
buted to Visvakarman, the heavenly architect. There seems to have 
been more than one title to this work : one is called the Visvakarmg. 
Prakasa or Visvakarma-Vastu-sastra, another is called the Visvakarmiya- 
Silpa, apparently the same as the Visvakarmiya-silpa-Sdsira? The 
one designated as Visvakarma-Prakasa or Visvakarma-Vastu-Sastra deals 
with directions on the building of houses, the making of roads, tanks, 
etc. The treatise contains thirteen chapters in which the following 
topics are dealt with : etene he 

(1) Mangaldcharana—auspicious preliminaries (benediction). 

(2) Vastu-purushotpatti-varnanam—the origin of the presiding deity 
of the house, Mdanasara VII, XXXV. 

(3) Bhimi-lakshana—soil, M., II, III. 

(4) Griha-pravesa—first entry into the house or house-warming, 
M., XXXVII. 

(5) Ahanana-vidhi—digging (ploughing) the soil, M., V. 

(6) Svapna-vidhidreams. 

(7) Bhami-phalam—fruit of the soil, M., IW We 

(8) Griharambhe samaya-vidhi—auspicious time for beginning a 
building, M., XXXV. 

(9) Dhvajadhyaya-phalani—flags. 

(10) Aya-wyayamsadinam phalani, M., EAN OXON, IX XOXO 
LXIV, LV. 

(11) Griha-madhye devadinaém sthapana-nir naya—installation of idols 
in temples, M., in many places. 

(12) Dhurvddi-griha-bheda, M., not specified. 

(13) Dodra-manani—measurements of doors, M., XX XIX. 

(14) Stambha pramanam—columns, M., XV. 

(15) Grihdnath $ala-nirnaya—halls of houses, M., XXXV. 

(16) Grihdrambha-kala-nir naya—almost the same as (8). 

(17) Grihadrambhe lagna-kun dalistha-graha-phalani, M., not specified. 

(18) Sayyd-mandira-bhavana-sumana-sudharadi-grihandralakshanani (see 
below the comparisons of the Purdnas and Agamas), referred to in 
many places in M. 


1Egg. Catalogue, p. 1 129. A treatise bearing the same title was published by 
the Venkatesvara Press, Bombay, in Sarhvat 1952, Saka, 1817, another at Benares 
in 1888. The same treatise is stated to have been translated into Bhasha under 
the title Palarama Vildsa by Mukula Saktidhara Sarma, at Lucknow, in 1896. 

In the Oriental Manuscripts Library, Madras, there is a MS. bearing the title 
Visvakarmiya-Silpa-Sastram (Catalogue, Vol. XXI, no. 13057). 


166 


INDIA AND ABROAD 


VISVAKARMA-SILPA 


(19) Pdadukd-updnaha-mafchadinadm mdna-lakshana—measurement of 
footwear, shoes, couches, etc., referred to in many places in M. 

(20) Sanku-Sild-nydsa-nir naya—finding out the cardinal points, etc., 
by means of a gnomon, M., VI. 

(21) Vastu-deha-lakshanam pijanam beli-dana—offerings, M., VIII 

(22) Sild-nydsa—referred to in many places in M. at ! 

(23) Prasdda-vidhana—palaces, M., XL. 

(24) Silpa-vydsa, M., not specified. 

(25) Prasdda-nirnaya, M., XIX—XXX., 

(26) Pithika-lakshana—pedestals (of the phallus), M., LITI, XIII. 

(27) Mandapa—pavilions, M., XXXIV. 

(28) Dvara-lakshana—doors, M., XXXVITI, XXXIX. 

(29) Vapi-kupa-tadagodyanu-kriyad—making of tanks, wells, pools, 
gardens, referred to in many places in M. 

(30) Daru-chchhedana-vidhi—cutting of wood, A., XV. 

(31) Griha-pravesa-nir naya—almost the same as (4), M., XXXVI. 

(32) Griha-praveSa-kala-Suddh, M., XXXVI. 

(33) Sayydsana-dolikadinam lakshana—bedsteads, seats, palanquins 
hammocks, almost the same as (18). 

(34) Durga-nirnaya—forts and fortified cities, M., X. 

(35) Salya-jnanam, Salyoddhara—semi-astrological topics, referred 
to in many places in M. 

(36) Nagara-sambandhi-rqja-grihadinam nirnaya—the palaces in cities, 


5 : 
It should be noticed that most of these topics of this version of 
Vigvakarman refer to non-architectural and chiefly astrological 
matters. It is also worth noticing that this treatise leaves out 
sculptural topics altogether. 
The Visvakarmiya-Silpa,! apparently the same as is mentioned 
in Rajendralala Mitra’s notices of Sanskrit manuscripts, is a Nagari 


1In Raja Dr. Rajendralala Mittra’s Notices of Sanskrit MSS. (Vol. I, no. 73, 


. 142). 
E Grins other version, Visvakarmiya Silpa-sastra, the Madras MS. noted above, 
which was copied by Nitla Sirappa on Saturday, the 5th day of the bright fortnight 
of the Agvija month in the year Jaya, contains a statement referring to Vigvakarma’s 
debt to Brahma. Indra, Maya, Bhargava, Angirasa, Dhruva, Gautama, Gargeya, 
Manu, Vyasa, and Bhrigu. Agastya is also referred to. It is stated to have been 
founded on the revelation of Viévakarman and traced back successively to Brihad- 
ratha, Parasara, and Sambhu. In the Manasdra the origin of the science is 
attributed to Siva, Brahma, and Vishnu, and through Indra, Brihaspati, Narada 
and others it was revealed to Manasara ; Visvakarman, Maya, Tvashtar, and 
Manu represent the heavenly architects, and Sthapati, Siitragrahin, Vardhaki and 
Takshaka form the guild of modern architects, but there are thirty-two other 


architectural authorities mentioned in the Manasara. 


167 


sILPA-§ASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


copy made in 1872 from an original written in the Hala-Kanadj 
character, the older codex being in the library of the Raja of Tanjore. 
‘ None of the MSS. examined by Mr. Burnell is perfect or even toler. 
ably correct. This treatise is apparently a compilation, as it is Written 
in the Tantric style, having Siva for its narrator.’ The contents are 
classified under the following seventeen chapters : 

(1) Visoakarmotpaitih karma-visesha-bhedena wavahritra-takshaka-varddha, 
kyadi-Sabda-vyutpattis cha—origin of Visvakarman, derivation of the 
words takshaka, vardhaki, etc., M., II. 

(2) Satyadi-yuga-j dta-narochchata-praménam, Jajittiya-kashthena prasta- 
renava deva-pratima-nirmane manddi—height of man in different ages of 
the world, wood, and stone for the construction of images, 

(3) Takshakasya garbhadhanadi-samskéra-kathanam, &arbhotpatti-katha- 
nadi cha—sacraments for sculptors and carpenters. 

(4) Stva-lingadi-pratishthartham sabha-nirmapadi—halls for the instal- 
lation of Siva’s phallus and other gods, M., LIT. 

(5) Graha-pratima-nirmana-pramanam, linga-pitha-nirmana-pramanadi 
cha—proportions of images of the planets and phalli. 

(6) Ratha-nirmana-vidhi-kathanam—cars and chariots, M., XLIII. 

(7) Ratha-pratishtha-vidhih—consecration of cars, M., XLIII. 

(8) Brahmi-MaheSvaryadinam svar upadi-var naddi—characteristics of 
Brahmi, Maheévari, and other goddesses, M., LIV. 

(9) X% ajnopavita-lakshanarh—Brahmanical sacred thread, 

(10) Suvarna-rajata-mujy adi-nirmita-yajtopavita-kathanart digbhedena 
devasthapana-prakar adi, meru-dakshina-sthita-hema-Silakathanadi  cha— 
sacred thread of gold, silver, mufija fibre, the cardinal points at 
which images of gods and goddesses are to be installed, qualities 
of (the stone-god called) Hema-éila (iit. golden stone) to be found 
to the south of the Meru mountain. 

(11) Lakshmi-Brahmi-M. Ghesvary adi -devindradi -dikpdla-grahadi-miurti- 
nirmana-prakdra—images of Lakshmi, Brahmi, Maheévari and other 
goddesses, of Indra and other Dikpalas (quarter-masters), planets 
and other gods, M. LIV, etc. 

(12, 13) Mukuta- kirita - jata - muky tadi - nirmana - prakaradi—crowns, 
crests and headgear, M., XLIX. 

(14) Sthavardsthavara-sithasana-nirmana-prakarddi, punar  viSeshena 
kirtta-lalata-pattikadi-nirmana-prakarah, Devataya mandirasya cha jirnod- 
dhara-prakaéra—movable and fixed thrones for images, crests, crowns, 
bands and other headgears, repairs of temples, M., XLII, XLV. 

168 


F 
INDIA AND ABROAD iio Ge 


15) Linga-murti-mandira-do dr adi-kathana—proporti 
ane to phalli, M., XXXVIII, XXXIX, 1 demon 

(16) Pratima-mirti-mandira-doaradi-kathana—proportions of doors of 
temples to (other) images, M., XXXVIII, XXXIX. 

(17) Vighnesa-m iirti-mandiradi-nirmanadi-vidhitemples for the im- 
ages of VighneSa (GaneSa) and other matters. 

This portion of the treatise of Visvakarman is chiefly sculptural. 
The treatment of the subject is in detail, although not so elaborate 
as in the Amsumad-bheda of Kasyapa. I am inclined to think that the 
two versions form in fact the complete treatise attributed to Visva- 
karman. 

We have seen that Visvakarman refers to the authority of Maya- 
mata. If this Mayamata be the same person as the author of the 
Mayamata discussed above, and there seem reasons to think so, 
Vigvakarman might have been indebted to the Manasara through 
Mayamata, if not directly. Even the brief comparison of the two 
treatises given above may serve to indicate that there may have been 
such a relation of indebtedness between the Visvakarma-silpa and the 
Manasara. 


169 


§ILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


Tue AGaAstya 


Agastya is a name frequently cited, we have seen above, as an 
authority on architecture. Unfortunately, the manuscripts discovered 
are incomplete and devoted solely to sculpture. One of the manu- 
scripts bearing the title Agastya-Sakaladhikara contains the following 
chapters : 

(1) Mana-samgraha—system of measurement, Mdnasdra, II, LV. 

(2) Uttama-dasa-idla—tlarge type of the ten-tdla measure, M. .» LXV, 

(3) Mdadhyama-dasa-tala—intermediate type of the  ten-talq 
measure, M/., LVI. 

(4) Adhama-dasa-iala—small type of the ten-tdla measure, M., XLI, 

(5) Pratima-lakshana—general rules on images, M., LXIV. 

(6) Vrishabha-vahana-lakshana—bull, the riding animal of Siva, 
M., LXII. 

(7) NateSvara-vidhi—image of NateSvara (dancing Siva), M., LI. 

(8) Shodasa-pratima-lakshana—sixteen images, M., LXIV. 

(9) Daru-samgraha—collection of wood, cf. M., XV. 

(10) Mrit-samskara—preparing earth for images, mentioned in 
various places, cf. /., LX VIII. 

(11) Varna-sarskaéra—preparation of colours, mentioned in various 
places in MM. 

In a Madras manuscript the following topics are described! : 

(1) Mana-samgraha-visesha—specially on measures, M., II, LV. 

(2) Uttama-dasa-tala—large type of the ten-idla, M., LXV. 

(3) Madhyama-dasa-tala—intermediate type of the ten-tala, M., 
LXVI. 

(4) Somaskanda-lakshana—image of Soma and Skanda, M., not 
specified. 

(5) Chandra-Sekhara-lakshana—image of Siva, M., LI, LII. 

(6) Vrishabha-vahana-lakshana—image of the bull, 4., LXII. 

Chapters 7 to 18 seem to be missing. It is not clear whether or 
not the following 7-14 (which numbers are not found in the 
compilation) are to be attributed to Agastya : 

(7) Tripurantaka-lakshana—image of Siva, cf. M., LI, LIL. 


1Tn the Oriental Manuscripts Library, Madras, there are two fragmentary MSS. 
ascribed to Agastya (Cat., Vol. XXII, nos. 13046, 13047). They deal with astrological 
matters bearing upon architecture. In the same library (Cat., Vol. XXII, no. 13058) 
there is a large manuscript of 429 pages, of 2 5 lines to a page, of paper 131” 8”. 
Two large portions of this compilation are ascribed to Agastya. 


170 


INDIA AND ABROAD AGASTYA 


(8) Kalydpa-sundara-lakshana—image of Kalyana-Sundara. 
(9) Ardha-narisvara-lakshana—image of Siva, M., HAT ToL 

(10) Pasupata-lakshana—image of Siva, M., LI, LIL. 

(11) Bhikshatana-lakshana—image of Siva as a beggar, M., not 
specified. ¢ 

(12) Chandesdnugraha-laksha na—image of Siva, M., LI, LII. 

(13) Dakshina-mirti-lakshana—image of Siva, M. LI, LIT. 

(14) Kala-dahana-lakshana—image of Siva, M., LI, LI. 

(15-18) Apparently missing. 

(19) Pratima-lakshana—images, M., LXIV. 

In another portion of the compilation the following chapters are 
numbered, as shewn in parallel column : 

(20) (3) Upapitha-vidhana—pedestal (for image), M., XIII, LMI. 

(21) (9) Siila-mana-vidhéna—measurement of pikes for images, cf. 
M., LXVII. 

(22) (10) Rajju-bandha-samskéra-vidhi—making ropes, M., Il. 

(23) (11) Varna-samskara—preparation of colours mentioned in 
various places in M. 

(24) (12) Akshi-mokshana—chiselling of the eye, M., LXX. 

We have seen above that Agastya is mentioned, together with 
Maya, as one of the authorities on which Visvakarma’s treatise is 
based. Agastya was, therefore, presumably known to Visvakarman. 
Owing to the incomplete nature of Agastya’s extant works the con- 
nexion of Agastya with Mayamata and with the Manasdra is not 
clear at present. It is true, however, that several chapters of Agastya 
are strikingly similar to, if not taken from, the corresponding chapters 
of the Manasara. 


171 


SILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHI TECTURE Ly 


THE SANAT-KuMARA-VASTU-SASTRA 


Another authority frequently referred to is Sanat-kumira. There 
are several fragmentary manuscripts of his treatise. But they are 
incomplete. In one of the manuscripts the following Subjects are 
dealt with? : 

(1) Griha-samsthapana—situation of houses, M., XXXVI. 

(2) Nakshatra-graka-yoga-vidhi—constellation of planets and stars (in 
determining the auspicious times) in connexion with the building of 
houses, M4., XXXV. 

(3) Graha-lagna-vidhialmost the same as (2). 

(4) Taru-tantra-vidhion trees (wood, for building houses with), 
referred to in many places in M/. 

(5) Bhi-pariksha-vidhi—examination of Soi es. TVs. 

(6) Nakshatra-tithi-vara-suddhi—on auspicious time, M., XXXV. 

(7) Nakshatra-lagna-phala-doara-bandha-Subha-sthana-nirnaya-ascertain- 
ing auspicious time and place (in constructing doors), M., IV, V, 
XXXV. 

(8) Griha-prevesana—first entry into the newly-built house, M., 
XXXVII. 

This treatise of Sanat-kumira is stated to have been based on the 
works of Brahman, Sakra, Yama, Bhargava, Angirasa, Maya, 
Gautama, Gargya, Manu, Vyasa, Bhrigu, Visvakarman, and others. 

The same list is differentiy given in another manuscript (no. 
13064), where Sakra is replaced by Chandra, and Maya is omitted. 

But in other manuscripts (nos. 13062, 13068) Sakra is not replaced 
by Chandra, although Maya is omitted. 

As we have seen above, Viévakarman acknowledges his debt to 
Maya. Sanat-kumara mentions Visvakarman as his authority ; it is, 
therefore, not unlikely that of these lists the first one, which contains 
Maya, is correct. If the view that Maya is indebted to the Manasara 
be accepted on the grounds discussed above, it would be easy to infer 
that Sanat-kumara may be also indebted, directly or indirectly, to 
the Manasara. 

; ’ 5 " 2: 3 Oriental 
eatin ee.° [Sete eee S, Vol Sx, nos. 
13060-13068). 

* Madras manuscripts, no. 1 3060. 


172 


INDIA AND ABROAD MANDANA 


Tux Sitpa-SAsTRA OF MANDANA 


The treatise of Mandana, otherwise called Raja-vallabha-Mandana, 
Siitradhara-Mandana, and also perhaps Bhipati-vallabha, is unique 
ina sense. He seems to be a historical person. He is stated to have 
been ‘in the employ of King Kumbhakarna of Medapatha, and the 
husband of Mirabai.’ According to Tod, King Kumbha ruled over 
the country of Mewar from a.D. 1419 to 1469.1 This treatise bears 
the titles Silpa-Sastra, Vastu-Sastra, and also Prdasdda-Mandana-Vastu- 
Sastra.” It deals with the architectural disposition of houses, palaces 
and temples in the following fourteen chapters : 

(1) Misraka-lakshana—classification, cf. Manasara, I, III. 

(2) Vastu-lakshana—characteristics and classification of archi- 
tectural objects, M. ITI. 

(3) Ayddi-lakshana—architectural formule of measurement, M., 
LXVI. 

(4) Prakara-yantra—vapi-kupa-tadaga-lakshana—courts, tanks, wells, 
pools, machines, described in several places in M. 

(5) Rdja-griha-nivesadi-lakshana—opening of the royal palaces, M., 
XL, XXXVII. 

The 28th verse of this chapter (V) mentions the Matsya-Purdna as an 
authority on the subject. 

(6) Eka-sala-dvi-§ala-griha-lakshana—houses with one and two halls 
or rows, described in many places in M., cf. XXXV. 

(7) Doi-sala-tri-Sala-chatuh-Sald-griha-lakshana—houses with two, 
three, and four sides, described in many places in M., cf. XXXV. 

(8) Sayana-siruhdsana-chhatra-gavaksha-sabhashtaka-vedika-chatushtaya- 
dtpa-lakshana—bedsteads or couches, thrones, umbrellas, windows, 
eight councils, four platforms, and lamps, an abridged collection 
of several subjects described in M!., XLIV, XLV, XXXIII, etc. 

(9) Raja-grihadi-lakshana—royal palaces, M., XL. 
(10) (Mapita)-Kshetradbhuta-lakshana, building site, M, IV, V. 


1 Bhandarkar’s Report, ibid, 1882-83, p. 37- 


2 Bee., 3142, 1291, 3147, 2253- ; , Bate 
eee one of these manuscripts is published with some diagrams by Bharati 


at Baroda, 1891. ; 2 - 
Five oiher manuscripts are ascribed to Mandana: (i) Véastu-Mandana, (ii) 


(iii) Vastu-sara, (iv) Ripa-Mandana, and (v) Apa-tattva. 
173 


Vastu-Mafjari, 


SILPA-SASTRAS AINDU ARCHI TECTURE IN 


(11) Dina-Ssuddhi-griha-nivesa-griha-pravesa-vivaha-muhirig - lakshana— 
auspicious times with regard to beginning the construction arial 
entry into the house, and the wedding, cf. M., XXXV, XXXVIL 

(12) Gochara-dina-ratri-mdna-svarodaya-kitta-chakra-matrika - lakshana— 
astronomical calculations bearing upon architecture, cf. M., XXXYV. 

(13) Jpotisha-lakshana—astrological consideration, cf. M., XXXV. 

(14) Sakuna-lakshana—auspicious signs, cf. M., XV. 

The manuscript bearing the title Prasada-Mandana- Vastu-Sastra 
by Sttradhara Mandana (Egg., 3147, 2253) contains the following 
eight chapters, which, except the first one, are apparently in con- 
tinuation of the fourteen chapters stated above. 

(1) MiSra-kalafa—the jug ornament, mentioned in many 
places in M. 

(15) (2) Ayatanadnikara—temples, buildings, cf. M., XIX-XXx. 

(16) (3) Bhitit-pitha-mand[ap|a-vara[dvdra]- garbha - griha - udumbara- 
pramana—walls, pedestals, open courts, doors, shrines, etc., M., XIII, 
XXXIV, XXXVIII, XXXIX, etc. 

(17) (4) Pramdana - drishti - pa(a@)da - sthana - Sikhara-kalasa-laksha na— 
measures, sight (perspective), pillars, finials, towers, M., II, DOVE (ie: 

(18) (5) Rajyadi-prasadadhikara—royal kingdoms, palaces, ANE 5 Whe 
XL, XLI, XLII, etc. 

(19) (6) Kesaryadi-prasdda-jati-lakshana, patcha-kshetra-parcha-chatvd- 
rimsan-meru-lakshanaddhydya—KeSari and other classes of buildings, 
forty-five types of buildings beginning with Meru; compare /M., 
XVIII, XIX-XXX, and see comparison of the Manasara with the 
Purdnas and the Agamas discussed below (p. 189-196). 

(20) (7) Mandapa-balanka-sambaranadhikara—open courts, etc. M., 
XXXIV, etc. 

(21) (8) firnoddhara-bhinna-dosha-sthavara-pratishthd, Sitradhara-p ij a, 
Fina-pratishtha, vastu-purusha-vinydsa—repairing and other defects, con- 
secration of movable images, offerings to architects (carpenters), 
consecration of Jain images, description of the presiding deity of the 
house, M., LXTX, II, VIII, LV, VII, etc. 

As has already been suggested, these two parts of Mandana’s 
treatise in some respects seem to be two overlapping portions of 
one work. Other treatises ascribed to Mandana are fragmentary 
and useless for any attempt to combine the several portions into a 
complete whole. 


174 


INDIA AND ABROAD MANDANA 


The important points relating to this historical treatise are well 
worth noticing. First its date is pretty certain, secondly it mentions 
the Matsya-Purana, and lastly it contains a list of forty-five buildings, 
classified under five headings, bearing titles and giving details which 
correspond exactly to the lists and titles discovered in many important 
treatises.+ 

Another point to be noted is that many of its chapters contain 
matters which are, in fact, different topics and have been more 
logically described under different headings in the Manasara and other 
works. It is, therefore, likely that Mandana’s work is more or less 
a compilation from many sources. 


1The Agni-Purana, the Garuda-Purdna, also the Matsya-Purana, the Bhavishya- 
Purana, the Brihat-samhita as well as the Kamikagama, the Suprabhedagama and the 
Manasara (see pp. 189-196). 


175 


SILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE [y 


Tue SAMARANGANA-SUTRADHARA OF Kine BuojapEva 


This is also a huge compilation completed in eighty-three chapters 
edited by Ganapati Sastri, and printed in two parts from Baroda, 
(1) Mahdsamagama—deals with the arrival of the heavenly archi- 
tect, Visvakarman, to build villages, towns, and buildings, Be, 
Manasara, I. 

(2) Visvakarmanah putra-samvdda—refers to the children of the 
heavenly architect, M/., IT. 

(3) Prasna—questions regarding houses, etc., cf. A/., III. 

(4) Mahadadi-sarga—deals with the creation of things and the 
world. 

(5) Bhiparimiti—deals with the division of the world into different 
countries and islands. 

(6) Sahadevadhikdra—deals with the first human attempt to build 
houses with forest trees. 

(7) Varnasrama-vibhaga—classification of human beings into castes 
and orders with a view ‘to place them in various kinds of villages and 
towns. 

(8) Bhipartksha—examination of soil, M., Chapters TVeVe 

(9) Hasta-lakshana—scheme of measurement, M., II. 

(10) Pura-nivesa—moats, enclosures, etc., of villages and towns, 
M., IX, X. 

(11) Vastu-traya-vibhaga—site-plans, M., VII 

(12) Nadyadi-Sradi-vikalpa—continuation of the site plans, M., VII. 

(13) Marma-bheda—continuation of site plans, M., VII. 

(14) Purushaiga-devata-nighantoadi-nirnaya—spirit of the site, M., Il. 

(15) Rdja-nivesa—forts and fortified towns for kings, M@., xX. 

(16) Vana-pravefa—to go to forests for wood and timber, M., XV 

(17) Indra-dhvaja-niripana—instruments for cutting wood, etc., con- 
tinuation of (16), M7., XV. 

(18) Nagaradi-samjid—towns, M., X. 

(19) Chatus-sald-vidhana—houses with courtyard and buildings on 
four sides, compilation from several chapters of Manasara and other 
works, 

(20) Nimnochchadi-phala—levels of the building site, M., VI. 

(21) (Dovd-saptati)-trisala-lakshana—certain-plan with buildings on 
three sides of the courtyard, M., XXXV. 

178 


INDIA AND ABROAD SAMARANGANA-SUTRADHARA 


(22) Dot-Sdla-griha-lakshana—other plans with buildings on two sides 
of the courtyard, M., XXXV. 

(23) Eka-Sala-lakshana—single-rowed houses, M., XXXV. 

(24) Dodra-pitha-bhitti-manadi—door, pedestal, wall, etc, M., 
XXXVIIT, XXXIX, XIII, etc. 


(25) Samasta-grihanam samkhya-kathana—Mansions of various kinds, 
M., XXXV. 


(26) Ayddi-nirnaya—formule for verification of correct dimensions, 
compilation from various places in M. 

(27) Sabhashtaka—eight kinds of halls, compilation from various 
places in M. 

(28) Grtha-dravya-pramana—mostly on doors, M., XXXVIII, 
XXXIX. 

(29) Sayandsana-lakshana—bedsteads and seats, etc., M4., XLIV, 
XLV. 

(30) Rdja-griha—royal palaces, M., XL. 

(31) Yantra-vidhéna—tit. architectural instruments (cf. engineering 
chapters of Vitruvius), compilation from various sources. 

(32) Gaja-sala—elephant stables, compilation from various places 
in VM, 

(33) Asva-sala—horse stables, compilation from various places in M. 

(34) Aprayojya-prayojya—sculptures and paintings on palaces, con- 
tinuation of (30), M., XL. 

(35) Stld-nydsa-vidhi—on foundation, M., XII. 

(36) Balt-dana-vidhi—treligious offerings, M., VIII. 

(37) Kilaka-stitra-pata—nails, etc., compilation from various places 
in M, 

(38) Vastu-samsthana-matrika—distribution of houses in the plot, 
M., XXXVI, XXXVII. 

(39) Dodra-guna-dosha—on doors, M., XX XVIII, XXXIX. 

(40) Pitha-mana—plinth, cf. M., XIII. 

(41) Chaya-vidhi—on plinth, continuation of (40), M., XIII. 

(42) Santi-karma-vidhi—offerings, etc., M., VIII. 

(43) Dvara-bhanga-phala—on orientation M., VII. 

(44.) Sthapati-lakshana—qualifications, etc., of the architects, M., ite 

(45) Ashtanga-lakshana—on site-plans, distribution of buildings, 
road-measures, etc., a confused compilation of several chapters in M. 

(46) Torana-bhangadi-fantika—on ritualistic matters, continuation 


of (42). 
179 


Gpa-§ASTRA HINDU ARCHITECTURE Ly 


a7) Vedi-lakshana—on platforms, pedestals, etc., in many places 
in M. 

(48) Griha-dosha-niripana—on defective construction, cf. M., LXIX, 

(49) Ruchakadi-prasada-lakshana—on palaces and vimdnas, cf. M. 
SOQVINUL, 2 ; 

(50) Prasada-Subhasubha-lakshana—continuation of (49). 

(51) Ayatana-nivefa—dimensions of palaces, etc., continuation 
of (49). 

(52) Prasada-jati—classification of palaces, continuation of (49). 

(53) Jaghanya-vastu-dodra—on doors, M., XX XVIII, XXXIX, 

(54) Prasada-dvdra-mana—on palace doors, continuation of (49). 

(55) Meroddi-shodasa-prasdda—on palaces, continuation of (49). 

(56) Ruchakadi-chatuh-shashtt-prasada—on palaces, continuation 
of (49). 

(57) Mervadi-virnsika—on palaces, continuation of (49) and (55). 

(58) Prasada-stavana—on distribution of palaces to kings and gods, 
continuation of (49). 

(59) Vimanddi-chatuh-shashtt-prasada—on palaces, continuation 
of (49). 

(60) Sri-kutadi-shat-trimhSat-prdsdda—on palaces, _ continuation 
of (49). 

(61) Pitha-panchaka—five varieties of plinth and pedestal, M., XIII, 
LITI. 

(62) Dravida-prasada-lakshana—Dravidian palaces of two to ten 
storeys, cf. M., XX—XXVIII. 

(63) Mervadi-vimsika-ndgara-prasdda—Nagara palaces, M., XIX- 

(64) Dig-bhadradi-praséda—on palaces, continuation of (49). 

(65) Bhimija-prasdda—on local palaces, continuation of (49). 

(66) Mandapa-lakshana—on pavilions, M., XXXIV. 

(67) Sapta-virnsati-mandapa—on. pavilions, M., XXXIV, continua- 
tion of (66). 

(68) Jagatyanga-samudayadhikara—on platform in palaces, continua- 
tion of (49). 

(69) Fagati-lakshana—continuation of (68). 

(70) Linga-pitha-pratima-lakshana—on pedestal of the phallus and 
on altars and images, M., LITI, LXIV. 

(71) Chitroddefa—on paintings, from several places in M. 

(72) Bhimi-bandha—on paintings, continuation of (71). 

180 


INDIA AND ABROAD SAMARANGANA-SUTRADHARA 


(73) Lepya-karmadika—on paintings and whitewashing, continua- 
tion of (71). 

(74) Andaka-pramana—on paintings, continuation of (71). 

(75) Manotpatti—on proportionate measures of images, same as 
T dla-mana of Manasara, LXV, LXVI, LIV-LXIIL. 

(76) Pratima-lakshana—on images, M., LXIV. 

(77) Devadi-ripa-praharana-samyoga—on images, M., LI, LIV, etc. 

(78) Dosha-guna-nir ipana—defects and merits in images, M., LXIX. 

(79) Ryvdgatadi-sthana-lakshana—on postures and attitudes of im- 
ages, in many places in M. 

(80) Vaishnavadi-sthanaka-lakshana—on erect and other postures, 
continuation of (79). 

(81) Pafcha-purusha-stri-lakshana—on images of birds, M., LX, etc. 

(82) Rasa-drishti-lakshana—on expressions of images, continuation 
of (79). 

(83) Patakddi-chatuh-shashti-hasta-lakshana—on patterns and designs 
of paintings, in several places in M. 

This outline of the contents of a modernized text will clearly show 
its compilation in a confused manner. There is no logical sequence 
or order in the arrangement of the chapters. The contents of the 
same chapter have been unnecessarily described in several chapters. 
The patron being a king, and the primary object being the royal 
palaces, some twenty-one chapters (KLIX-LXX) have been devoted 
to the same subject. Because the compilation was largely, if not 
wholly, based on the Mdnasdara, however, some thirteen chapters at 
the end have been devoted to the subjects of sculpture and painting, 
as has been done in the Manasdra, although the treatment is less 
methodical. The preliminary chapters dealing with the origin of the 
world and arrival of the heavenly architect are the only original, but 
entirely non-architectural, matters. 


181 


SILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHITECTURE tw 
THE SAMGRAHA 


This work is avowedly a compilation (samgraha). It bears the 
title Si/pa-samgraha, and, to our great relief, it expressly mentions the 
sources from which it has been compiled.* In fact, several of the 
architectural treatises compared above, and many more not men- 
tioned here, are evidently compilations, although the authors have 
not acknowledged their debt, nor even mentioned the sources drawn 
upon. This point is convincingly illustrated in the following instance. 

The following chapters in the order found in the manuscript are 
ascribed to : 

1.—Manasara : 

Under 7, Gomukha-lakshana—under this heading there is no 
separate chapter in the eleven manuscripts of the Manasara so 
far known to exist. 

(13) Upapitha-lakshana—pedestals (M. XIII). 

Under 15, Vrishabha-lakshana—image of the bull, the riding 
animal of Siva (A4., LXII). 

II.—Mayamaia : 

Under 6, Dtk-parichchheda—the cardinal points. 

(23) Mandapa-vidhdna—open sheds. 

(9) Grama-vinydsa—villages. 

(20) Eka-bhiimi-ro(v1)dha(a@)na—one-storeyed buildings. 

Under 86, Sthapati-lakshana—characteristics and qualifications 
of the architect. 

(24) Gopura-vidhana—gate houses. 

(13) Upapitha-oidhina—pedestals. 

(1) Adhishthdna-vidhana—hbases. 

(20) Dvi-bhiimi-vidhdna—two-storeyed buildings. 

Under 20, T1i-bhiimi-vidhina—three-storeyed buildings. 

Ill.— Kasyapa : 

Under 7, Prastara-lakshana—entablatures. 

Under 7, Adhisthaina-patala—bases. 

Under 7, Nala-pramdanotsedhalankarana—drains and canals. 

Under 24, Dakshind-mirti-patala—an image of the god Siva. 

Under 22, Nyitta-lakshana—image of dancing Siva. 


1 Oriental Manuscripts Library, Madras, Cat., Vol. XXII, no. 13058. It com- 
prises 429 pages of 25 lines to a page of paper 13}”X8". 
182 


INDIA-AND ABROAD cnn 
1V.—Visvakarman : 
Under 6, Gopura-lakshana—gate-houses. 
Under 36, Sayana-lakshana—bedsteads and couches. 
(86) Sthapati-lakshana—characteristics and qualifications of the 
architect. 
(14) Aydadi-sampad-artha-vidhana-—the formula of Aya, etc. 
V.—Agastya : 
Under 1, Mdna-samgraha-visesha—system of measurement. 
Under 2, Uttama-dasa-idla—the large type of the ten-tala 
measure. 
Under 3, Madhyama-dasa-tdla—the intermediate type of the 
ten-idla measure. 
Under 4, Soma-skanda-lakshana—images of Soma and Skanda. 
Under 5, Chandra-Sekhara-lakshana—image of Siva. 
Under 6, Vrisha-vahana-lakshana—image of Siva, riding on the 
bull. 
It is not known for certain whether or not the following, under 
6 and 1g, are to be ascribed to Agastya. 
Under 6, Tripurantaka-lakshanpa—image of Siva. 
Under 6, Kalyadna-Sundara-lakshana—image of Kalyana-Sundara 
Siva. 
Under 6, Ardha-narisvara-lakshana—image of Siva. 
Under 6, Pasupata-lakshana—image of Siva. 
Under 6, Bhikshatana-lakshana—image of Siva. 
Under 6, Chandesanugraha-lakshana—image of Siva. 
Under 6, Dakshind-mirti-lakshapa—image of Siva. 
Under 6, Kala-dahana-lakshana—image of Siva. 
Under 19, Pratima-lakshana—images in general. 
(3) Upapitha-vidhana—pedestal. 
(9) Sila-mana-vidhana—pikes. 
(10) Rajju-bandha-samskara-vidhi—preparation of ropes. 
(11) Varpa-sarnskara—preparation of colours. — 
(12) Akshi-mokshana—chiselling the eyes of an image. 
VI.—Bhrigu : : 
Under 7, Ratha-nirména—construction of chariots. 
VII.—Paulastya : : 
Under 22, Dakshind-mirti-nirmapa—image of Siva. 
VIIT.—Narada : , , 
Under 14, Krishpa-lakshapa—image of Krishna. 
183 


SILPA-SASTRAS HINDU ARCHI TECTURE IN 


IX.—Narayana : 

Under 20, Rama-Lakshana—image of Rama. 
X.—Maushalya : 

Under 7, Ratha-lakshana—chariots. 
XI.—Sesha-bhashya : 

Under 36, (title missing). 

Under 22, Ekatala-vidhiana—one-storeyed buildings, 

XII.—Chitra-sara : 
Under 14, (title missing). 
(7) Pratimdasara (?). 
XIII. Sarasvaia : 

Under 28, Chandesvara-vidhana—image of Chandeévara. 

(28) Garuda-lakshana-patala—image of the Garuda bird ; Rama- 
Lakshmana-patala—the images of Rama and Lakshmana. (The 
term fatala, usually used in the Agamas, indicates that these 
chapters may have been borrowed from some Agamas.) 

Under 20, Gopura-mana—gate-houses. 

(1) Mana-samgrahadi—the system of measurement. 

XIV.—Visva-sara : 

Under 20, Afva-mana-vidhi—image of the horse. 

Under 20, Vira-bhadra-lakshana—image of Virabhadra. 

Under 20, Skanda—image of Skanda. 

Under 20, Tripuri—image of Tripuri. 

Under 20, Pratimadi—images, etc. 

XV.—Chitrazjnidna : 
Under 20, Dhvaja-danda-pata-lakshana—flagstaff and banner. 
Under 20, jtrnoddhara—repairs. 
XVI.—Kapiijala-samhita : 
Under 20, Garuga-lakshana—image of the Garuda bird. 
XVII.—Kaumudi : 
Under 29, Pratima-lakshana—images in general. 
XVIII.—Brahma-silpa : 
Under 15, Sayana-lakshana—bedsteads and couches. 
XIX.—Brahma-yamala : 
Under 5, Chamundi-dhyana—characteristics of the goddess 
Chamundi. 
Under 20, Dasavatara-lakshana—images of the ten incarnations 
of Vishnu. 


184 


INDIA AND ABROAD 
SAMGRAHA 


XX.—Dipta-tanira : 
Under 15, Linga-lakshana—Phallus. 

XXI.—Dipii-sara : 

Under 8, Gopura-lakshana—gate-houses. 

Of these, it will be noticed, numbers I to V refer to treatises dis- 
cussed above, VI to X refer to authors whose treatises are not 
mentioned here, and the rest refer to treatises and not to their 
authors. In fact, it is practically impossible to trace the authors of 
these latter treatises, as is the case with several others dealing with 
architecture and cognate arts. 

The brief sketch of this compilation, as well as the other illustrative 
Silpa-sastras presented above, incidentally substantiate two theories. 
Most of the architectural treatises, whether or not ascribed to an 
author, historical or mythical, are but compilations. Some of these 
have actually acknowledged the sources drawn upon, while others 
have not. This practice of misappropriating somebody else’s property 
is prominently shown in works like the Purdnas and the Agamas ; 
which in most cases are undeniably huge compilations gathered 
together from various sources dealing with heterogeneous subjects. 
The second theory is that the Manasara, though itself a compilation, 
because the author seems to have consulted some thirty-two author- 
ities on architecture, appears to be the standard work on the subject, 
inasmuch as it is the most complete, scientific, and probably the 
oldest extant record. This last impression will be further strengthened 
by comparison of the Manasdra with the architectural portions of the 
Puranas, the Agamas, and the Brihat-samhitd in detail. 


185 


CHAPTER V 
POSITION OF THE MANASARA IN LITERATURE 


THe Types OF BUILDINGS 


WITH A VIEW to ascertaining the position of the Manasara in relation 
to the non-architectural literature it will be necessary to discuss 
the points of similarity in detail. It is, however, practicable, in an 
article like this, to take into consideration only the architectura] 
portions of works which deal with the subject specially. For the 
purpose of an elaborate treatment we propose to compare the 
Manasara with the Agni-Purana, the Garuda-Purdna, the Matsya-Puréna, 
the Bhavishya-Purana, the Brihat-samihta, the Kamikdgama, and the 
Suprabhedagama. 

It has been pointed out at the outset that architecture comprises 
a variety of subjects, but it cannot be denied that the fundamental 
business of the architect is with buildings, residential, religious, and 
military. It appears to be a fashion among many peoples of the past, 
as of the present, to designate individual buildings by proper names, 
with or without a meaning. It seems to have been a custom among 
the ancient Hindu architects to describe buildings under some such 
names. In the eight treatises we have proposed. to compare in detail, 
we find buildings bearing proper names classified and described in 
the following way : 

1. In the Manaséra the main buildings are described in some 
thirteen chapters.2 Their common features from bottom to top are 
given under storeys, varying from one to twelve. They are also classi- 
fied under styles—Nagara, Vesara, and Dravida—chiefly in accord- 
ance with the shape of the topmost part®; under sizes*—as Suddha, 


1 Compare, for instance, Whitehall, Guildhall, Mansion House, Cosy Corner, 
Gordon Castle, Benmore, Barnes Castle, Svastika, Vijaya, Vipulanka, Indra- 
kanta, Chatur-mukha, Pafichala, Dravida Kamala-Bhavana, Chitta-Visrama, etc. 


2 Chapters XVIII to XXX, see the summary of contents in the preceding section 
under XVIII. 


* For details of these styles, see the writer’s Encyclopaedia, under Nagara. 
“ Large, intermediate, and small. 
186 


INDIA AND ABROAD TYPES OF BUILDINGS 
Migra, and Sarhkirna—in accordance with t ; : 
they are built! ; under Jati, Chhanda, Vinten ae nel 
accordance with the various lengths of the els with Ae 
buildings are measured”; under Sthanaka, Asana, and Sa Bn 
which are otherwise called Sarnchita, Asarhchita, acl eee 
respectively? ; and under shapes, Purhliiga (masculine), Strilinga 
(feminine)* and Napurhsaka (neuter). , 6 

The details of the ninety-eight types of buildings, described accord- 
ing to the number of storeys, are given below. The numerical figures 
on the left indicate the serial numbers, and those on the right refer 
to the lines or verses of the chapters. 

I. The eight kinds of single-storeyed buildings with their charac- 
teristic features, Chapter XIX— 

(t) Vaijayantika, with round spire (sirsha), pinnacle (Sirah), and 
neck (girva) (line 166); (2) Bhoga has karna or ears (187) ; (3) 
Srivigala has the bhadra or front porch in it (168) ; (4) Svasti- 
bandha has octagonal finial (szrsha) (168) ; (5) Srikara has quadran- 
gular gikhara or steeple (170) ; (6) Hastiprishtha has oval steeple 
(171); (7) Skandatara has hexagonal spire and neck (172) ; (8) 
Keéara has the front porches in the centre of the side-towers 
at the corners of the roof, and its nose, head, and neck are round 
or quadrangular (173-175)? : 

II. The eight kinds of two-storeyed buildings, Chapter XX 
(the general features are the same in all the eight kinds; the dis- 
tinction lies in the different proportions given to the component 
parts from above the ground floor to the top)— 

(9) Stikara (lines 94, 2-9); (1°) Vijaya (94, 10-15) 5 (21) 
Siddha (94, 16-18); (12) Paushtika (94, 19-25) ; (13) Antika (94, 
25-27) ; (14) Adbhuta (94, 28-33) 3 (15) Svastika (95; 34-41) ; and 


1 (a) Suddha, or pure, made of one material (brick, iron or wood) ; (4) oe 
or mixed, made of two materials ; (c) Sarnkirna, or amalgamated, made 0 
three or more materials. M., XVII, 139-142. 

4 M., XIX, 2-5. 

® Referring respectively to height, breadth, and 
The three latter sets also refer to the postures of 
namely, erect, sitting, and recumbent. 

in case of temples, the former 


* Equi i ively. But ® 
quiangular and rectangular res ectively- 5 

contains fern deities, while the latter may contain both fens and male deities, 
M., XIX, 14-17. For the neuter class, se the Kamikdgama below. 


5 For further details, see the writer’s Encyclopaedia, under Ekabhimt. 
187 


length, M., XIX 7-9, 10-11. 
the idols in case of temples, 


POSITION OF MANASARA IN HINDU ARCHI TECTURE ty 
LITERATURE 

(16) Pushkala (94, 42-43). The projection, the general description 

and the carvings on the doors, when these buildings are used ag 

temples, are given (44-93, 96—-116).2 

III. The eight kinds of three-storeyed buildings, Chapter XXI 
(the general features and characteristic marks are similar to those of 
two-storeyed buildings)— 

(17) Srikanta (lines 2-11); (18) Asana (12-21) ; (ro) Sukhalaya 
(22-30); (20) Kesara (31-32); (21) Kamalanga (33-38) ; (22) 
Brahmakanta (39-40) ; (23) Merukanta (41-49) ; and (24) Kailaga 
(50-52)." . 

The general features, characteristic marks, and other details of 
the following kinds are similar to those of the two- and three-storeyed 
buildings—— 

IV. The eight kinds of four-storeyed buildings, Chapter XXII— 

(25) Vishnukanta (lines 3-12) ; (26) Chaturmukha (13-24) ; (27) 
Sadasiva (25-33) ; (28) Rudrakanta (34-43) ; (29) ISvarakanta 
(44-46) ; (30) Mafichakanta (47-57); (31) Vedikanta (58-59) ; 
and (32) Indrakanta (60-88).? 

V. The nine kinds of five-storeyed buildings, Chapter XXIII— 

(33) Airavata (lines 3-12); (34) Bhiitakanta (13-15); (35) 
Visvakanta (16-18) ; (36) Miurtikanta (19-24); (37) Yamakanta 
(25-29) ; (38) Grihakanta (30-38); (39) Yajfiakanta (33-40) ; 
(40) Brahmakanta ; and (41-42) Mahakanta and Kalyana.? 

VI. The thirteen kinds of six-storeyed buildings, Chapter 
XXIV— 

(41) Padmakanta (lines 3-12); (42) Kantara (13-14); (43) 
Sundara (15) ; (44) Upakanta (16); (45) Kamala-aksha (17-18) ; 
(46) Ratnakanta (19); (47) Vipulanka (20); (48) Jyoti(sh)kanta 
(50); (49) Saroruha (51-52) ; (50) Vipulakritika (53) ; (51) Svasti- 
kanta (53); (52) Nandyavarta (54); and (53) Ikshukanta (55).? 

VII. The eight kinds of seven-storeyed buildings, Chapter 
XXV— 

(54) Pundarika (lines 3-23); (55) Srikanta (24); (56) Sribhoga 
(25) 3 (57) Dharana (26) ; (58) Pafijara (27); (59) Agramagara (28) ; 
(60) Harmyakanta (29) ; and (61) Himakanta (30).? 

3 further details, see the writer’s Encyclopaedia, under dvi-tala and 
Yi-lala. 


2¥For further details, see the writer’s Encyclopaedia, under chatus-tala, paitcha-tala, 
shaj-tala, sapta-tala, ash{a-tala, nava-tala, dasa-tala, and ekddaga-tala. 


188 


INDIA AND ABROAD TYPES OF BUILDINGS 


VIII. The eight kinds of eight-storeyed buildings, Chapter 
SO 

(62) Bhikanta (lines 3-21); (63) Bhiipakanta (22-28); (64) 
Svargakanta (29-34); (65) Mahakanta (35-39); (66) Janakanta 
(40) _ (67) Tapa(s)kanta (41-42); (68) Satyakanta (43-45); and 
(69) Devakanta (46-47).* 

IX. The seven kinds of nine-storeyed buildings, Chapter 
XXVI— 

(yo) Saurakanta (lines 5-9) ; (71) Raurava (10) ; (72) Chandita 
(11-12); (73) Bhishana (13-14) 3 (74) Vivrita (20-22); (75) 
Supratikanta (23-26) ; and (76) Visvakanta (27-33).4 

X. The six kinds of ten-storeyed buildings, Chapter XXVIII— 

(77) Bhikanta (lines 6-8); (78) Chandrakanta (6-8); (79) 
Bhavanakanta (9-13); (80) Antarikshakanta (14-15); (81) Megha- 
kanta (16-17); and (82) Abjakanta (18). 

XI. The six kinds of eleven-storeyed buildings, Chapter 
XXIX— 

(83) Sambhukanta (lines 3-7); (84) Iéakanta (8-9); (85) 
Chakrakanta (10-14); (86) Yamakanta (15-17) ; (87) Vajrakanta 
(18-24) ; and (88) Arkakanta (24-33) 4 

XII. The ten kinds of twelve-storeyed buildings, Chapter 
XXX— 

(83) Pafichala (lines 8-10) ; (90) Dravida (8-10) ; (91) Madhya- 
kanta (11-14) ; (92) Kalingakanta (14-16) ; (93) Varata (Virata ?) 
(17-27); (94) Kerala (28-30); (95) VarhSakanta (31-32) 3 (96) 
Magadhakanta (33-34): (97) Jana(ka)kanta (33-36) 5 and (98) 
Sphirjaka (? Gurjaraka) (7, 37-84) ; description of the twelfth 
storey.” 

2. Agni-Puréna, Chapter XLII, verses 1-9 (general plan), 10-25 
(plan with reference to the idol), Chapter 104, vv. I-II, 22-34 
(further general plan), 11-21 (names, classes, shapes, and descrip- 
tion of forty-five kinds of temples). 


1For further details, see the writer’s Encyclopaedia, under chatus-tala, paiicha-tala, 


lasa~ Aadasa-tala. 

shat-tala, sapta-tala, ashta-tala, nava-tala, dasa-tala and ¢ wip 

! » ashi ‘ : ft historic places, well 
2 These ten kinds are named, it should be noticed, after a mae Tength and 


marked in the ancient geography of India, which cover 
breadth of the continent. 

‘The topography of these places x desorbed elsewhere (BP. 954 700), sen cse 
architectural details of these buildings, see the writer s Tee tial 
ten terms. The description of the twelfth storey is given uni 


189 


BUREN OF ReeNgEERA IN HINDU ARCHITECTURE In 
Five divisions depending on five shapes (plans), each includin 
nine kinds of temples (Chapter CIV, vv. 11-13)— 6 

I. Vairaja—quadrangular (square)—includes (1) Meru, (2) Man. 
dara, (3) Vimana, (4) Bhadra, (5) Sarvatobhadra, (6) Charuka 
(in the Kamikagama, XXXV, 87, 91: Ruchaka), (7) Nandika 
(8) Nandi-varddhana, and (g) Srivatsa (Chapter CIV, wv. 14, 1) ) 

II. Pushpaka—rectangular—includes (10) Ba(Va)labhi, (tr) Gri- 
haraja, (12) Salagriha or Salamandira, (13) Visala, (14) Sama, (15) 
Brahma-mandira, (16) Bhavana or Bhuvana, (17) Prabhava, and 
(18) SivikaveSma (Chapter CIV, wv. 16, 17). 

Tif. Kailasa—round—includes (19) Ba(va)laya, (20) Dundubhi, 
(21) Padma, (22) Maha-padmaka, (23) Varddhani, (24), Ushni, 
(25) Sankha, (26) Kalaga, and (27) Svavriksha (Chapter CIV, wy, 
17-18). 

IV. Manika—oval (ortttdyata)—includes (28) Gaja, (29) Vrisha- 
bha, (30) Harhsa, (31) Garutmat, (32) Rikshanayaka, (33) Bhi- 
shana, (34) Bhidhara, (35) Srijaya, and (36) Prithivi-dhara 
(Chapter CIV, jvv. 19-20). 

V. Trivishtapa—octagonal—includes (37) Vajra, (38) Chakra, 
(39) Svastika, (40) Vajra-svastika, (41) Chitra, (42) Svastika-khadga, 
(43) Gada, (44) Srikantha, and (45) Vijaya (Chapter CIV, wy. 
20-21). 

3. Garuda-Purana (Chapter XLVII) has exactly the same general 
plan (vv. 1-20, 32-47), five shapes, five classes (v. 21-23), and 
forty-five kinds of buildings (vv. 24-32), but the wording is not 
identical. The fourth class is read Malika (v. 21) in the general 
description, but the name ‘ Manika’ (v. 30) is given later on— 

I, Vairaja—square (vv. 21-22)—includes the same nine kinds, 
but (7) Nandika is read as Nandana, and (6) Charuka is correctly 
read as Ruchaka (vv. 24-25). 

II. Pushpaka—rectangular (vv. 22-23)—includes nine kinds where 
(10) Valabhi is correctly spelt, (13) Visala is read as Vimana, which 
is apparently a mistake in the Garuda-Purdna, because (3) Vimana 
is a kind of building included in the square (I) Vairaja class. But 
the reading of class (II) seems better in the Garuda-Purana, which may 
be quoted—(ro) Valabhi, (11) Griharaja, (12) Salagriha, (13) 
Mandira, (14) Visala (text has Vimana), (15) Brahmamandira, 
(16) Bhavana, (17) Uttambha, and (18) Sibika-veSma (vv. 
26-27). 

1g0 


INDIA AND ABROAD TYPES OF BUILDINGS 


III. Kailasa—round (vv. 21—23)—has nine kinds, again perhaps 
with better readings—(19) Valaya, (20) Dundubhi, (21) Padma, 
(22) Mahapadma, (23) Mukuli (in place of Varddhani), (24) 
oe (25) Sankha, (26) Kalaga, and (27) Guva-vriksha (vv. 
28-29). 

IV. Manika—oval (vv. 30)—has nine kinds, of which (31), (32), 
and (33) are read as Garuda, Sithha, and Bhimukha respectively 
(vv. 29-30). 

V. Trivishtapa—octagonal (vv. 21, 23)—has nine kinds, readings 
again seem better here—(37) Vajra, (38) Chakra, (39) Mushtika 
(preceded by Babhru, vv. 31), (40) Vakra, (41) Svastika, (42) 
Khadga, (43) Gada, (44) Srivriksha, and (45) Vijaya (vv. 31-32). 

4. The Matsya-Purdna, Chapter 269— 

The description of the general plan (verses 1-7) is followed by 
that of the special plan (vv. 8-20). 

The names (vv. 28-30), description of architectural details (vv. 
31-46), measures (vv. 47-51), and division (vv. 53-54) of twenty 
types of buildings— 

(1) Meru has 100 cupolas (srivga), 16 storeys (bhimika), many 
variegated steeples (stkhara), and is 50 cubits broad (wv. 28, 31, 53) ; 
(2) Mandara has 12 storeys, many steeples and faces, and is 45 cubits 
broad (vv. 28, 37, 47, 53); (3) Kailaga has nine storeys (many 
steeples and faces), and is 40 cubits broad (vv. 32, 47; 53) 3 (4) 
Vimana-chchhanda has eight storeys, many steeples and faces (dnana), 
and is 34. cubits broad (vv. 25, 32, 33, 47) 53) 3 (5) Nandi-vardhana 
has seven storeys, and is 32 cubits broad (vv. 29, 33, 48, 53) 3 (6) 
Nandana has seven storeys, and is furnished with vishdpa or horns, 
and is 30 cubits broad (vv. 29, 33, 48, 53) 3 (7) Sarvatobhadra has 
five storeys, 16 corners with various shapes, is furnished with art 
galleries (chitrasala), and is 30 cubits broad (vv. 29, 34, 35. 48, 53) ; 
(8) Valabhi-chchhandaka has five storeys, many steeples and faces, 
and is 16 cubits broad (vv. 35, 50, 53) ; (9) Vrisha should resemble 
the height and length of the bull, be round and without corners, 
should have five cupolas, two storeys, and should be 4 cubits broad 
at the central hall (vv. 30, 36, 44, 45, 53); (10) Sirhha resembles 
the lion and is 16 cubits broad, is adorned with the famous chandra- 
sala (top rooms, gable windows), and by the width of the front neck 
six storeys high (vv. 29, 36, 40, 49, 53) ; (11) Gaja resembles the 
elephant, and is 16 cubits broad, and has many chandraSalas or top 


Ig! 


POSITION OF MANASARA IN HINDU ARCHI TECTURE IN 
LITERATURE 

rooms (vv. 36, 41, 49, 53) ; (12) Kumbha resembles the water-jar 
has nine storeys, five cupolas (andas), and is 16 cubits broad (vv. 
37, 49, 53); (13) Samudraka has 16 sides around, 2 chandrasalas 
(top rooms) at the two sides, two storeys (vv. 38, 53) ; (14) Padma 
has three storeys, 16 corners, a variegated steeple, and is 20 cubits 
broad (vv. 30, 39, 49, 53); (15) Garuda has the bird-design 
around, seven storeys, three top rooms, and is 8 cubits broad, and 
there should be 86 (?) compartments (bhimzka, lit. storeys, vy. 42) 
all round the outside (vv. 41, 43, 51). There is a similar Garuda 
building with ten storeys, and a second Padmaka-building with 
two storeys more (? 12 storeys, v. 43) ; (16) Harhsa, is ro cubits 
broad (vv. 36, 51) ; (17) Vartula is 20 cubits broad (vv. 29 49, 53). 
No special description is given of the remaining : (18) Chaturagra 
(four-cornered, vv. 28, 53); (19) Ashtasra (eight-cornered, v. 29, 
53) ; (20) ShodaSsdasra (sixteen-cornered, vv. 29, 53).* 

Similar types of buildings are described almost in the same way 
in both the Bhavishya-Purdna and the Brihat-samhitda. 

5. The Bhavishya-Purdna, Book I, Chapter CXXX, names (vy. 
23-26), description of the architectural details and measures (vv. 
27-35) of the twenty kinds of buildings (same as in the Brihat- 
samhita, see below) — 

(1) Meru, 39 cubits high and 32 cubits broad, has 12 storeys, 
various windows (kuhara), and four gateways (v. 27). 

(2) Mandara, 30 cubits broad, and has ten storeys (v. 28). 

(3) Kailaga, 28 cubits broad, has steeples and eight storeys (v. 
28). 

The description of the following is clearer in the Byihat-samhitd, 
quoted below ; the names may be given here— 

(4) Vimana, with latticed windows (v. 29). 

(5) Nandana (v. 29). 

(6) Samudga (v. 30), Samudra (v. 24) as in the Brihat-samhita 
(LVI, 28, 5). 

(7) Padma (v. 30). 

(8) Garuda (v. 31). 

(9) Nandi-vardhana (v. 28, Narhdi, v. 31). 

(10) Kufijara (v 32). ; 

(11) Griharaja (v. 32), Brihat-samhita (LVI, 25) has Guharaja. 


1 Compare the three divisions of these buildings according to sizes. 
192 


INDIA AND ABROAD TYPES OF BUILDING 


(12) Vrisha (v. 33). 

(13) Harhsa (v. 33). 

(14) Ghata (v. 33). 

(15) Sarvatobhadra (v. 34). 

(16) Sirhha (v. 35). 

(17) Vritta (as in the Brihat-samhita, LVI, 209, 49); but here 
(v. 33) it reads Vrisha-like (12), which is apparently a mistake (see 
Vv. 30). 

No special description is given of the remaining— 

(18) Chatushkona, four-cornered (v. 25), Matsya-Purana (Chapter 
CCLXIX, vy. 28, 53) has Chaturasra ; and Brihat-samhita (VI, 28) 
has Chaturasra. 

(19) Ashtasra, octangular (v. 25). 

(20) Shodasasra, sixteen-cornered (vy. 25). 

Varahamihira seems to have taken these from an earlier Purana 
and improved them in the Brihat-samhita. 

6. The Brthat-samhita, LVI, 1-19— 

The religious merits acquired by building temples (vv. 1-2); 
suitable sites—in the garden, wood, banks of rivers (seas), tanks (vv. 
3-8) ; ground (v. 9); general plan (v. 10) ; situation of doors (v. 10) ; 
comparative measures of length, breadth, and height (vy. 11), of 
the adytum (garbha, v. 12), of the doors and their different parts (vv. 
12-14) ; carvings on the door (v. 15) ; comparative measures of the 
idol, pedestal, and door (v. 16) ; the heights of storeys (v. 29-30). 

This is followed by a classification (vv. 17-19) and an account 
of the architectural details (vv. 20-28) of the same twenty kinds of 
temples (prdsdda) as are given in the Matsya-Purdna and the Bhavishya- 
Purana. The names of these buildings are given below, details being 
almost the same as in the Purdnas— 

(1) Meru (v. 20). 

(2) Mandara (v. 21). 

(3) Kailasa (v. 21). 

(4) Vimana-(chchhanda) (vv. 17-22). 
(5) Nandana (v. 22). 

(6) Samudga (v. 23). 

(7) Padma (v. 23). 

(8) Garuda (v. 24). 

(9) Nandivardhana (v. 24). 

(10) Kufijara (v. 25). 

193 m 


7 


POSITION OF MANASARA IN HINDU ARCHITECTURE | 
LITERATURE ) 


(11) Guharaja (v. 25). 
. (12) Vrisha (v. 26). | 

(13) Harhsa (v. 26). 

(14) Ghata (v. 26). 

(15) Sarvatobhadra (v. 27). 

(16) Sirhha (v. 28). 

(17) Vritta (vv. 18-28). 

(18) Chatush-kona (vv. 18-28). 

(tg) Ashtasra (v.: 18-28). 

(20) Shodagasra (vv. 18-28). 

7. The Kamikagama,' Patala LV— 

The four classes— 

Jati (verse 128), Chhanda (v. 129), Vikalpa (v. 130), and 
Abhasa (v. 130). 

Patala XLV— 

Further classifications— 

(t) Sarnchita, Apasarnchita, and Upasarhchita (v. 6). 

(2) Nagara (vv. 6, 12, 13), Dravida (vv. 6, 14, 15), and Vesara 
(vv. 7, 16, 18). 

(3) Jati (vv. 7, 19), Chhanda (vv. 4-20), and Vikalpa (vv. 7-20). 

(4) Suddha (vv. 7, 21), Misra (vv. 7, 22), and Sarhkirna (vv. 7, 22). 

(5) Purn-linga, or masculine, also called Sarhchita (vv. 8, 9), 
Strilinga, or feminine (vv. 9, 10), and Napurhsaka, or neuter (vv. 11). 

This class (5) does not refer (like the Mdndsara) to the sexes of the 
deities. Here they appear more like residential buildings ; their 
characteristic features are determined by architectural details. The 
distinguishing marks of the divisions in the other four classes (1 to 4) 
are similar to those of the Mdanasdara noticed above. 

In Patala XXXV, Salas, in almost the sense of Prasada, are 
divided into five classes : Sarvatobhadra (vv. 87, 88), Vardhamana 
(vv. 87, 88), Svastika (vv. 87, 89), Nandyavarta (vv. 87, go), and 
Charuka (vv. 87, 91). 

Their technical names*— 

(1) Sindhuka (XLV, vv. 23-28), (2) Sarapina (vv. 29-30), (3) 
Merukiita (v. 31), (4) Kshema (vv. 32-34), (5) Siva (vv. 35-38), (6) 

1 This Patala refers to the description of a single building and its component parts. 

So also does the Patala XLV (see under Malika), it is named Malika-(lakshana) 
and does not mean anything but Prdsdda: cf. Prasada-vyasa-dirghochcha prokta 
prasada-malika (11, 4). 

2 For further details, see the writer’s Encyclopaedia under these terms and Malika. 


£04 


INDIA AND ABROAD TYPES OF BUILDINGS 


Harmya (vv. 39-40), (7) Saumya (v. 40 » (8) Visa 3 
Sarvakalyana (vv. 43-49), (10) Lae a ae a o 
51), (12) Rafgamukha (v. 52), (13) Alpa (vv. 53-54), (14) [eral 
(vv. 55-58), (15) Geya (wv. 58a-59), (16) Sara (v. 60), (17) 
Pushkara (vv. 61, 63), (18) Adbhuta (v. 612), (19) Sarnkirna (62), 
and (20) Danda (v. 64). 

8. The Suprabhedagama, Patala XXXI (named Prasida)— 

Three styles of temples—Nagara, Dravida, and Vesara (vv. 38-39). 

Different kinds of temples—(r) Kailasa, (2) Mandara, (3) Meru, 
(4) Himavat, (5) Nishadha (also called Nilaparvata, Mahendra), (6) 
Nalinaka, (7) Pralinaka, (8) Nandyavarta, (9) Srivarta (? Sripada), 
and (10) Parvata (vv. 40-52). 

Mandapas are first divided into four classes— 

Deva-mandapa, Snapana (bath)-mandapa, Vrisha (bull)-, Nandi- 
mandapa, and Nritta (music)-mandapa (vv. 96-97, 98-99) ; and 
further classified under epithets, Nandavritta, SriyAvritta, Virdsana, 
Jayabhadra, Nandyavarta, Manibhadra, and Viéala (vv. 110-104). 

The attention of readers is invited to the lists of the buildings 
described in the eight works under observation. 

The list in the Manasdra contains in 12 classes (storeys) 98 types of 
buildings ; the Agni-Purdna has in five classes (or divisions) 45 types ; 
the Garuda-Purana also has in the same five classes (or divisions) the 
same 45 types ; the Matsya-Purdna has in three divisions 20 types ; the 
Bhavishya-Purana has left out the broader divisions but contains the 
twenty types ; the Brihat-samhitad in the very same way contains the 
twenty types ; the Kamikdgama has in three divisions (of various kinds) 
twenty types ; and the Suprabhedagama has left out all the minor divi- 
sions, but preserves the most important one, namely, the three styles 
(Nagara, Vesara, Dravida), which comprise ten types of buildings. 

The various broader divisions, such as Suddha, Sarnchita, Sthanaka, 
Jati, Purnlinga, etc., we have seen in the Manasara, are repeated in the 
same terms and same sense as in the Agamas. The most important 
division into the styles—the Nagara, Vesara, and Dravida—is also 
preserved intact in the latter works. These are purely architectural 
divisions, and they are not taken into consideration in the non- 
architectural treatises like the Purdnas and the Brihat-samhita. Even 
the broadest division into storeys, under which the Madnasara 
describes the buildings in 12 or 13 chapters, has lost its prominence 
in the latter works. 


199 


POSITION OF MANASARA IN HINDU ARCHITECTURE Iv 
LITERATURE 

Thus the Adnasara has the largest number of the types, namely 
98. The Agni-Purdna and the Garuda-Purdéna have 45 types each, 
The Matsya-Purana, the Bhavishya-Purana, the Brihat-samhita, and the 
Kamikagama have twenty types each. The Spurabhedagama has the 
smallest number of types, namely ten. 

The technical names of these types of buildings are, as we have 
seen above, common in many cases. We have also seen that in some 
instances the architectural details are identical. The lists of the Agni- 
Purana and the Garuda-Purapa on the one hand, and the Matsya-Purana 
the Bhavishya-Purdna, and the Brihat-samhita on the other, are strik- 
ingly similar. Of the works containing the lists of twenty types, the 
Brihat-samhita has the best description. In respect of brevity, expli- 
citness, and precision, the Suprabhedagama, which contains the smallest 
number of types, surpasses all; and it happens that the smaller the 
types the better the description. 

The common names of the types, the identity of their details, and 
the similarity in the description may not be accidental. The grades 
in the linguistic style and in the explicitness and precision of the 
description do not seem unconnected ; while the variations in the 
number of types of buildings treated in these works also may not be 
meaningless. Before hazarding an opinion, it will be better to com- 
pare some of the other important points of similarity between the 
Manaséra and the architectural portions of other works. 

Amongst others, the three crucial features in architecture, at least 
so far as these ancient records are concerned, seem to be the measure- 
ment, the orders or columns, and the styles. Similarities in these 
respects are hardly accidental and may be ascribed to a common 
origin. 


INDIA AND ABROAD MEASUREMENTS 


Tue MEASUREMENTS 


(A) The linear measurement is divided into six kinds! : 

(1) Mana, (2) Pramapa, (3) Parimana, (4) Lamba-mana, (5) 
Unmana, and (6) Upamana (M., LV, 3-9). 

References to these measurements are met with, also, in non- 
architectural treatises, like the Maitsya-Purdna (Chapter CCLVILII, 
verse 16) the Suprobheddgama (Patala XXXIV, verse, 35), as well 
as in the Bimbamana (British Museum, MSS. 658, 5292, verse 9). 

(B) The primary measurement (adimana) refers to comparative 
measurements and is divided into nine kinds. 

The height of an image is determined by comparing it with the 

(1) breadth of the main temple, 

(2) height of the adytum, 

(3) length of the door, 

(4) measurement of the basement, 

(5) cubit, 

(6) tala, 

(7) angula, 

(8) height of the worshipper, and 
(9) height of the riding animal (M., LV, 10-15). 

Each of the measurements is again divided into nine kinds 
(Af. LY, 22). 

Under (1), (2), (3), and (4), the proportions naturally vary on 
various occasions, but the general methods are similar in these 
treatises; compare for instances the Suprabhedagama (XXXI, wv. 
—I5). 

an angula (finger-breadth) and the hasta (cubit), (7) and (5), 
measures are in fact of the same class. The finger-breadth, equi- 
valent to % inch, is perhaps the earliest unit of measurement 


~~ 


1 Measurement from the foot to the top of the head is called Mana (which is 
nothing but height) ; 
ina i measurement of breadth; : 
pene is Be measurement of width or circumference ( fatal en é 
Lamba-mana is the measurement by the plumb-lines or the ne on ey 
pendicularly through different parts of the body, the mana or the me 
of height being taken by the surface of the body ; ee 
Unmana is the measurement of thickness (nimna) or as € let UN? 
Upamana is the measurement of interspace (antara), such as 


image. ; pe 
Sey are i and mdna are also mentioned in the Sukra-niti (I, 310), but 
pe J 


their meanings are not quite clear. 


197 


POSITION OF MANASARA IN HINDU ARCHITECTURE in 
LITERATURE 
invented by human brain. Though not liable to being lost in the 
course of time, it has its own defects, namely, the finger of two 
persons is hardly of equal breadth and the finger of a person is 
liable to change owing to various natural causes. Apparently with 
a view to avoiding these defects, finger-breadth is ascertained by 
the measures of certain other objects, atom, car-dust, hair-end 
nit, louse, and barley corn.1 The largest size of finger-breadth ie 
stated to be equal to 8 barley corns, the intermediate 7 barley corns, 
and the smallest 6 barley corns. Again, for the same purpose, 
this standard measure is divided into three kinds—mdndngula, 
matrangula, and dehalabdhangula. Of these, mdndngula, which is equal 
to 8 barley corns, is meant to be the unit proper. Maitrdngula 
is the measure taken by the middle finger of the master who makes 
an image (or a building), dehalabdhangula is the measure equal to 
one of the equal parts into which the whole height of a statute is 
divided for sculptural measurements.” 
This angula measure is practically the same in almost all the 
Indian works bearing upon measurement, for instance : 
(1) Manasara (II, 40-45, 46-47, 48-52, 53-64, LXIV, 49-53, etc.). 
(2) Brihat-samhita (LVIII, 1-2). 
(3) Siddhanta-Siromani, ed. Bapideva (p. 52). 
(4) Raja-vallabha-Mandana, ed. Bharati (Introduction). 
(5) Brahmanda-Purdna (Part I, section 2, Chapter VII). 
(6) Matsya-Purdna (Chapter CCLVIII, verses 17-18). 
(7) Vastu-vidyd, ed. Ganapati Sastri (I, 3-5f). 
(8) Bimbamdna (British Museum, MS. no. 558, 5292, verse of). 
(9) Suprabhedagama (XX, 1-9, 10-16, 20-26, etc.). 
(10) Kautiliya-Artha-sastra, ed. Shama Sastri (p. 106). 
Compare also : 
(11) Manu-samhita (VIII, 271). 
(12) Ramayana (VI, 20, 22). 
(13) Sata-patha-Brahmana (X, 2, 13, Ill, 5, 4, 5)- 
(14) Aitareya-Brahmana (VIII, 5). 


18 atoms = I car-dust. 
8 car-dusts = 1 hair-end. 
8hair-ends = 1 nit. 

8 nits = I louse. 


8 lice = 1 barley corn. 
8 barley corns = I avigula. 
2 For further details, see the writer’s Encyclopaedia under Avigula. 


198 


INDIA AND ABROAD MEASUREMENTS 


I ulva-Sit z 
ee Ih Sitra of Baudhayana (F.R.A.S., 1912, Pp. 231-233, 
i ol measurement.! But it seems more 
convenient to have the particular span, namely, the distance 
between the tips of the fully stretched thumb and middle finger 
which is technically called tala, as the unit.2 It admits of aay) 
varieties : ten-idla measures are mentioned in the Manasara,? while 
the Bimbamana has reference to twelve kinds. Each of these ten or 
twelve varieties is again divided into three types, namely, uftama or 
large, madhyama or intermediate, and adhama or small. Thus an 
image is of the ten- (dasa) tala measure when its whole length is ten 
times the face. In the large type of the ten-tala system, however, 
the whole length is divided into 124 equal parts, which are propor- 
tionately distributed over the different parts of the body ; in the 
intermediate type the whole length is divided into 120 equal parts ; 
and in the small type into 116 equal parts. In the nine-(nava)tala 
system, the whole length would be nine times the face, in the eight- 
(ashta)-tala, eight times, and so forth. 

The principle of the ¢ala measure is fundamentally the same in 
all the works dealing with the subject, although certain differences 
in matters of details are noticed, compare for instance : 

(1) Manasara (LX, 6-35; LVII, LIX, 14-64; 67-100; LXVI, 
2-78; LXV, 2-179). 

(2) Bimbamdna (verses 17-72, 91-198, and Appendix X). 

(3) Suprabhedagama (XXXIV, 30-34 ; XXX, 31-40). 

(4) Brihat-samhita (LVI, 4). 

(5) Arréumadbheda of Kasyapa (fol. 251, Eg. 3148, 3012). 

(6) Bramhdpda-Purdna (Part I, Anushamga-pada, VII, 97). 

(7) Matsya-Purdna (Chapter CCLVIII, verse IQ). ia) 

The details of the tala measures from the following authorities are 
given by Mr. Rao®: 

(8) Silpa-ratna. 


1 Matsya-Purana, Chap. CCLVIII, verse 19+ _ 
Mukhamanena kartavya sarvavayava-kalpand. 

2 Arn surnadbheda of Kasyapa, fol. 251. (MS. Egg., 3148; 

8 One to ten tala (M., LX, 6-35, etc-). 


4 One to twelve tala (Appendix). ale : away 
5 Elements of Hindu a ay, by T. A. Gopinath Rao, Appendix B, pp. 9-2 
199 


3012). 


= 


es pee eae IN HINDU ARCHITECTUR E ty 
(9) Amsumad-bhedagama. 

(10) Ka(?kt)randgama. 

(11) Vatkhanasadgama. 

(12) Kamikagama. 

Another exclusively sculptural measure is that mentioned under 
(8), (9), namely, the height of an image as compared with the height 
of the worshipper (yajamana), and the height of the riding animal 
(vahana) as compared with the height of the main idol. Each of these 
admits of nine varieties. The height of an image may be equal to the 
full height of its worshipper, and may extend up to his hair-limit on 
the forehead (sometimes it is stated to be the eye-line), nose-tip, 
chin, arm-limit to the shoulder, breast, heart, navel, and sex organ. 
The height of the riding animal is in the same manner compared with 
the height of the main idol. 

Corresponding to the above-mentioned sculptural measures there 
are exclusively architectural measures also. 

The architectural ganya-mdana,? or the comparative heights of the 
component members of a structure, correspond to the sculptural éala- 
mana, or the comparative heights of the component limbs ofa statue. 

The ghana-mana, or the measurement by the exterior, and the 
aghana-mana, or the measurement by the interior of a structure, are 
also exclusively architectural.? 

In another architectural measure the height of a structure is com- 
pared with its breadth. It admits of five proportions, technically 
called, Santika, Paushtika, Fayada, Sarva-kamika or Dhanada, and 
Adbhuta, the height being respectively equal to breadth, 14, 14, 12, 
and twice of the breadth. 

These latter items, highly technical and extremely minute in detail, 
are found in no other treatise under observation than the Mdnasara. 
Thus in respect of atleast purely architectural and sculptural measure- 
ments the Manasdra, of all these works, should occupy the first place. 


1 Manasara, LV, 30-33, etc. ; 

2 See the writer’s Encyclopaedia; and compare the Méanasdra, XXVII, ae 
XXIX, 35-38 ; KXXIII, 134-145, 216-217, 248; XLV, 86, g7-101; LIU, 
29-34; XIII, 36-40, etc. 

3 See the writer’s Encyclopaedia, sub voce. 

4 See the writer’s Encyclopaedia, under Utsedha. d 

When a large number of absolute measures are prescribed for the one ae 
the same object, the right proportion is selected by the test for the six eye ree 
technically called, aya, uyaya, riksha, yoni, vara, and tithi or amhsa (see detauls 1 
the writer’s Encyclopaedia under Shad-varga). 


200 


INDIA AND ABROAD FIVE ORDERS 


THE FivE Orpers 


Like the five Graco-Roman orders, Doric, Ionic, Corinthian, 
Tuscan, and Composite, columns in ancient India also were divided 
into five main orders or classes. In the Ménasdra! they are 
called Brahma-kanta,? Vishnu-kanta, Rudra-kanta, Siva-kanta, and 
Skanda-kanta. ‘These divisions are based on the general shapes of 
columns. With respect to dimensions and ornaments the five orders 
are called Chitra-karna, Padma-kanta, Chitra-skambha, Palika-stambha, 
and Kumbhastambha. A sixth variety in the latter division is 
pilaster and not pillar proper, and is called Koshtha-stambha and 
Kudya-stambha.8 

Among the Purdnas, these details are very clear only in the Matsya- 
Purdna. In this Purdna,* as well as in the Brihat-samhita,® the five 
orders are called Ruchaka, Vajra, Dvi-vajra, Pralinaka, and Vritta. 

Of the Agamas,® the Suprabhedigama contains the essential details. 
The names of the five orders according to this Agama’ are Sri-kara, 
Chandra-kanta, Saumukhya, Priya-darsana, and Subhankari; the last 
one is stated to be the Indian composite order, being a compound 
of Saumukhya and Priya-darsana, just as the Greco-Roman composite 
order is a compound of Corinthian and Ionic. 

Between the European and the Indian columns, however, there is 
obviously a striking point of difference. Of the Graeco-Roman orders 
the five names have been left unchanged, while in India the names 
of the five orders have varied in various treatises referred to above. 
It is true, all the same, that the criteria of divisions are essentially 
the same in the Manasdra, the Agamas, the Purdnas, and the Brihat- 
samhita.2 We have also seen above that the Mdnasara contains two 
sets of names of the five orders, one set referring, like the Agamas, 
the Puranas, and the Brihat-samhita, to the shapes of the columns, 
or more precisely the shafts, while the other refers mostly to the 
capitals. The works, other than the Vastu-Sastras, as represented 


1 XV, 20-23, 31, 39, 40 73> 204. ; 
a Ae eceonel = Corbis Inscriptionum Indicarum, Vol. III, p. 252, 253; 


1 i 7 . 212, 216 verse 151. 
oieraigia Tae ce i 4 Matsya-Purdna, Chap. CCLX, vv. 1-6. 


84. 
5 Rthorconhitd, LIL, 27-30, also 7. R. A. S. (N. S.), VI, p. 285, notes 1, 2. 
: Ua ee the wanerearia, Potala XXXY, 24-26, 161, LV, 203, ete. 
’ = tala XXXI1, 65-67. be 
ge eet, rave and for further details consult the writer’s Encyclo~ 
paedia, under Stambha. 
201 


POSITION OF MANASARA IN HINDU ARCHITECTURE a 
LITERATURE 

by the Mdnasara, have not kept this distinction clear. Wha; a 

can reasonably infer from this as regards the mutual relation oe 
these treatises will be further elucidated by a consideration of the 
component parts of the column. The question of variation of the 
names of the five orders in the Indian works can perhaps be 
explained. While in Europe the origin of the names of the five 
orders is traced to historical geography,* in India the names were 
based on the shapes of columns. And, as the Indians are compara- 
tively religious and poetical, rather than historical in temperament 
and imagination, they chose mythological and poetical names 
according to the spirit of the times when these various works were 
composed. Thus in the Mdnasara we see the orders bearing the names 
of mythological deities, Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra, Siva, and Skanda : 
as well as called Chitra-karna (variegated ears), Padma-kdnta (graceful 
like lotus), Chitra-skambha (of variegated shaft), Palika-stambha (edged 
like a measuring pot), and Kumbha-stambha (of jug-shaped capital) ; 
while, in the Agama, they bear highly poetical names : Sri-kara (beauti- 
fying), Chandra-kanta (graceful like the moon), Saumukhya (of very 
charming face), Priya-dargana (sight-pleasing), Subhankar? (auspicious). 
In the Purdnas and the Brihat-samhitad they are called Ruchaka 
(beautiful, pleasing), Vajra (club, hence lasting), Doi-vajra (doubly 
lasting), Pralinaka (firmly attached, hence a pilaster), and Vyitia 
(round, hence solid and dignified). 

With regard to the names and the functions of the component 
parts of the column, the variation is a little less marked; but these sub- 
servient parts, called mouldings and common to all orders, vary in 
number. Thus in the Mdnasara, which of almost all the treatises deals 
separately and exhaustively with the pedestal, the base, and the 
entablature, mention is made, in connexion with the pillar, of five 
mouldings,” apparently of the shaft, namely, bodhikd, musti-bandha, 
phalaka, tatikd, and ghata. The Suprabhedagama describes two sets of 


1 Doric is derived from the species of columns first seen in the cities of Doria 
(Vitruvius, IV, 1). That species of which the Ionians (inhabitants of Ionia) were 
the inventors has received the appellation of Ionic (ibid). Callimachus constructet 
columns after the model of the tomb in the country about Corinth, hence this 
species is called Corinthian (ibid). The other two orders, ‘Tuscan and Composite, 
are of Italian or Roman origin. The Tuscan order has reference to the country 
of Tuscany, formerly called Etruria, in Italy (Gwilt, Encyclopaedia of Architecture, 
article 178). 

2 Manasadra, XLVII, 16-18. 


202 


INDIA AND ABROAD FIVE ORDERS 


seven mouldings,? one set referring to the column of the main build- 
ing and the other to that of the pavilion—danda, mandi, kantha, kumbha, 
phalaka, vira-kantha, and potikd; and bodhika, uttara, vajana, mirdhika 
tulad jayanti, and tala. These increasing number of mouldings 
reached the significant number of eight in the Matsya-Purdna, the 
Brihat-samhita, and the Kirana-tantra, and bear the very same eight 
names,” to wit, vahana, ghata, padma, uttaroshtha, bahulya, bhara (or 
hara), tuld, and upatuld. 

The significance of the number eight referred to above lies in 
the fact that the component parts of the Greco-Roman orders 
also are eight in number,? and like the five orders themselves, their 
names are always the same ever since their introduction, though 
most of them have been given more than one name. They are called: 
(1) the ovolo, echinus, or quarter round; (2) the talon, ogée, or 
reversed cyma; (3) the cyma, cyma-recta, or cyma-tium; (4) the 
torus ; (5) the scotia or trochilos ; (6) the cavetto, mouth, or hollow ; 
(7) the astragal; and (8) the fillet, listel, or annulet. 

The Manasara refers to five mouldings ; the Suprabhedigama des- 
cribes seven ; and the Matsya-Purdna, the Brihat-samhita, and Ktrana- 
tantra each makes mention of eight mouldings. But if the very large 
number of mouldings,* described in the Manasara in connexion 
with the pedestal, the base, and the entablature, be also taken 
into account, the Manasdra will certainly exceed all other treatises 
under notice. Thus in the Manaséra we can detect the following 
mouldings® : (1) abja, ambuja, padma or saroruha (cyma) ; (2) antara, 


1 Suprabhedagama, Patala XXXI, 56-60, 107-108. : 
2 Matsya-Purana, Chap. CCLV, 1-6, Brihat-samhitaé, LIII, 29-30, Kirana- 
tantra, 7. R. A. S. (N.S.), VI, 285, notes I, 2. ; } 
8 See figures 867-874 and articles 2532, Gwilt, Encyclopaedia of Architecture, 
and Glossary of Architectural Terms, plate XXXIV. 
4 See the writer’s Encyclopaedia, under Upapitha, Adhishthana and Prastara. 
5 There are mouldings which bear a large number of names or synonyms, e.g. : 
(i) Kapota, prastara, maiicha, prachchhadana, gopana, vitana, balabhi, and matia- 
varand. : r ere rae 
(ii) Prati-prastara, prati-va@jana, anvanta, avasana, vidhdna and vidhadnaka. 
(iii) Prati-rupa, dalakara, vijana, vajana, kshepana, vetra, patta, uttara, pattika, 
kampa, trika, manda, and antarita. ae 
(iv) Tuld-danda, jayantt and phalaka. 
(vy) Kapota, vakra-hasta, lupa, gopanaka and chandra. ‘ F 
(vi) Samgraha, mushti-bandha, maddala, uddhyita-hasta, valabhi and dharana. 
(vii) Nataka, anta, mrindlika, vallika, chitranga and kulikanghrika. Pes 
(wiii) Uttara, vajana, adhara, adheya, Sayana, uddhyita, miirdhaka, mahatauli 


and svavamsaka 
203 


POSITION OF MANASARA IN HINDU ARCHIT. 
HITERATURE eT UREES 


antarita, antarala or antarika (fillet) ; (3) anghri ; (4) arhsu ; (5) argala « 
(6) adhdra; (7) alinga; (8) asana ; (9) bhadra; (10) bodhikg - (11) 
dala ; (12) dhara-(kumbha) ; (13) gala, griva, kantha or kandhara (dado) 
(14) ghata ; (15) gopana-(ka) ; (16) hara (bead) ; (17) janman (plinth) ; 
(18) kapota ; (19) kampa, kampana (fillet) ; (20) karna ; (21) kumbha : 
(22) kumuda (torus or astragal) ; (23) kendra; (24) kshepana ; (25) 
mushii-bandha ; (26) mila; (27) mrindla or mrinalika ; (28) nataka; 
(29) nasi; (30) nimna (drip) (31) patia or pattika (fillet) ; (32) ee 
or pratika ; (33) prati-vakra ; (34) prati-vdjana ; (35) prati-bandha ; 
(36) pratima ; (37) paduka ; (38) prastara ; (39) phalaka ; (40) ratna, 
compounded with kampa, patia, and vapra ; (41) tatikd ; (42) tunga ; 
uttara (fillet) ; (44) updna (plinth); (45) vapra or vapraka; (46) 
valabha or valabhi; and (47) vdjana (fillet). 

There are a number of compound mouldings also, such as kampa- 
karna, karna-padma, kshudra-kampa, kshudra-padma, kshepandmbuja, 
mahambuja, padma-kampa, ratna-kampa, ratnapatta, ratna-vapra, vajra- 
patta, etc. 

Again, of all these treatises, only the Manasara and the Agamas 
refer to certain highly technical and purely architectural matters. 
Thus in the Manasadra we find the measurements and other details 
of 64 varieties of bases divided into nineteen classes,! called (1) 
pada-bandha, (2) uraga-bandha, (3) prati-krama, (4) kumuda-bandha, (5) 
padma-kesara, (6) pushpa-pushkala, (7) Sri-bandha, (8) maficha-bandha, 
(9) Sreni-bandha, (10) padma-bandha, (1 1) kumbha-bandha, (12) vapra- 
bandha, (13) vajra-bandha, (14) Sri-bhoga, (15) ratna-bandha, (16) 
patta-bandha, (17) kukshi-bandha, (18) kampa-bandha, and (19) Sri- 
kanta. 

In the Suprabhedagama only four classes* of bases are mentioned, 
namely, padma-bandha, chdaru-bandha, pada-bandha, and prati-krama. 
The Kamikagama has only the general description of the pase.®) am 

In the Manasdra sixteen types of pedestals are described in detail 
under three classes,4 namely, vedi-bhadra, prati-bhadra, and mancha- 
bhadra. 


1 Manasara, XIV, 11-387. See details in the writer’s Encyclopaedia, under Adhis- 
thana. 

2 Suprabhedagama, XXXI, 17 f. 

8 Kamikagama, XXXV, 22, 23, 114, 116, 122, LV, 202. 

4 Manasara, XII, 37-127. See details in the writer’s Encyclopacdia, under Upa- 
pitha. 


. 
2 


204. 


ter 


INDIA AND ABROAD FIVE ORDERS 


Only scanty information of the pedestal is found in the Kamikdgama, 
the Suprabheddgama,* and a Tamil version of the Mayamata.* 

As regards the entablature, various mouldings and their measure- 
ments are described under eight classes in the Médnasdra.* The 
Kamikagama,*® the Suprabhedagama,® and the Vastuvidya’? have only 
briefly referred to the general description of the entablature. 

The comparative measurements of the column proper and the 
pedestal, the base, and the entablature, are also given in more detail 
in the Manasara than in the Agamas and some of the architectural 
treatises.® 

Thus in respect of the names of columns, the number of their 
subservient parts called mouldings, and also the base, the pedestal 
and the entablature, as well as their comparative measurements, the 
Manasara will always occupy the first place among all the treatises 
under observation. 


1 Patala XXXV, 115, 122. 

2 Patala XXXI, 12. : g us 

8 Essay on the Architecture of the Hindus, Ram Raz, pp. 23; 26. 

4 Chapter XVI, 22-149. See details in the writer’s Encyclopaedia, under Prastara. 

5 XXXV, 27-29; LIV, 1-4, 78, 9-46, 47- 

6 XXXII, aos eae : 

7 Ed, Ganapati Sastri, 23, 26. . A Mir 

8 See detail in the writer's Encyclopaedia, under Stambha, Upapitha, Adhisthana 
and Prastara. 


205 


POSITION OF MANASARA IN HINDU A 
LITERATURE RCHITECTURE IN 


Tue Turere STYLES 


The style is also a technical and purely architectural syp; 
Thus it is not dealt with in the Puranas, not to speak of the e a 
other poetical works where, as shown above, casual pieces a 
architecture and sculpture are met with. In some of the epi aie 
phical documents and the Brihat-samhita mention of the He : 
occasionally made. The Agamas contain a little more detail, while 
in the Manasdra the subject is exhaustively treated. i 

The Ndagara, Vesara, and Dravida are the three broad styles 
distinguished in the Mdnasara.1 They are applied to both architec. 
ture? and sculpture.* With reference to the construction of cars or 
chariots a fourth style is mentioned.* This is called Randhra, which 
seems to be a corrupt form of Andhra. In an epigraphical record,5 
Kalinga is mentioned as a distinct style of architecture. But if the 
identification of Vesara with Telugu or Tri-Kalinga be accepted, the 
Kalinga and the Andhra would be the two branches of the Vesara 
style. In the case of twelve-storeyed buildings, which are the most 
magnificent and imposing edifices as described, twelve special types, 
not necessarily the styles, of residential dwellings are also mentioned 
in the Manasara.® All these names are geographical, implying the 
twelve provinces into which the then India was divided architec- 
turally, if not also politically. And these types are distinctly based 
on geographical divisions, in exactly the same way as the three styles, 
the Wagara, Vesara and Dravida, as also the two branches of the 


1 Manasara, XVIII, 92-104. The WNagara style is distinguished by its 
quadrangular shape, the Vesara by its octagonal or hexagonal shape, and the 
Dravida by its round shape. For details, see pp. 258-259 and the writer’s Encyclo- 
paedia, under Nagara. 

2 Manasara, LIM, 53-54; XXI, 72-73 ; XXVI, 76; XLII, 124-125, etc. 

8 Manasara, LII, 78, 100; LIII, 46-47, etc. 

4 Manasara, XLIII, 124-125. 

5In the record itself, it is, however, stated that the WNagara, 
and Kalinga are four types, not styles, of buildings. (An inscription on 
of a pillar in the AmriteSvara temple at Holal, Government of Madras G. 
1260, August, 1915, Progress Report of the Assistant Superintendent for Ep} 
Southern Circle, 1914-15, p- 90.) “opel 

6 Pafchala, Dravida, Madhyakanta, Kalinga, Va(Vt)rata, Kerala, Vamsaka, Maga she 
Fanaka and Sphi(Gur)jaka (Manasdra, XXX, 5-7): We have fe ae aaa 
previous section ninety-eight kinds of mansions are described in the ; 2 ads 
In the above-mentioned Holal inscription a reference is made to sixty-10U 
of mansions. 


Vesara, Dravida, 
the capital 
G. O. no. 
graphy, 


206 


INDIA AND ABROAD THREE STYLES 


Vesara, the Kaliiga and Andhra, are based. The Greco-Roman 
orders, on which the European styles of architecture are mainly 
based, are also but geographical names. 

In the Kamikagama, as well as in the Suprabhedagama, frequent 
references to the three broad styles, the Ndgara, Vesara, and Dravida, 
are made.” 

The distinguishing features of these styles are practically exactly the 
same in all the three works, namely, the Manasara, the Kamikadgama, 
and the Suprabhedagama.* The Andhra and the Kalinga branches 
of the Vesara style are not mentioned in the Agamas. But we have 
seen that the Kamikdgama, like the Matsya-Purdna, the Bhavishya- 
Purana, and the Brihat-samhitad, describes twenty kinds of mansions, 
while the Suprabheddgama has reference to ten kinds. These varieties 
of buildings, as also the sixty-four kinds mentioned in the Holal 
inscription, and the ninety-eight kinds described in the Manasara, 
do not, however, represent the styles which fall only under three 
broad divisions, namely, the Ndgara, Vesara, and Dravida. 

In the Brihat-samhitd,* clear mention is made only of the Dravida 
style in regard to the measurement of the face, although the other 
styles may be said to have been implied. It is stated that according 
to one’s own azigula (finger’s breadth) the face (of an image) should 
be twelve angulas (nine inches) broad and long ; but as stated by 
the architect Nagnajit the face should be twelve argulas long and 
fourteen azigulas broad in the Dravida style. Obviously, therefore, 
the former measurement refers to other existing styles or those which 
are not specified here. Yat 

In regard to the styles also, therefore, the Mdnasara must be 
undoubtedly given the first place amongst all these works which 
for the purpose of the present item of comparison comprise 

tically the Agamas. : 
aS the jie of all these facts—merely to deal with the question 
in its aspects as they concern the Manasara—it seems to me impossible 
to resist the following conclusion. There appears to have been a 
relation of indebtedness between the Manasara and the other works, 
both architectural and non-architectural. Except in a few instances 


d footnote 7. 
ae Ae asa) 6-7, paws etc., Suprabhedagama, XXXI, 37-39, etc. 
8 For details, see the writer’s Encyclopaedia, under JVagara. 
4 Chapter LVII, 4. 


207 


POSITION OF MANASARA IN AINDU A RCHITECTURE in. 

LITERATURE 
noted above, it is, however, difficult to state definitely tha; ihe 
Manasara is the debtor or creditor to this or that work Im respect of 
this or that matter. Most of the difficulties, it is needless to observe 
hinge upon the chronology, which is the irritating point in the Sane 
krit literature. If the chronology of the works discussed above were 
definitely known, it would have been easier to assume that the works 
earlier than the Manasara had been known to its author and those 
later than the Manasara had been influenced by it. Except in cases of 
support by archaeological records, epigraphical or non-epigraphical, 
the dates assigned to Sanskrit works are mostly but provisional. 
I have discussed elsewhere the available materials and the reasons 
which have induced me provisionally to place the Manasara some- 
where in the fifth to seventh century of the Christian era. In view 
of the essential points of comparison and the accepted chronology 
of the works which have been critically studied by scholars, I should 
say that the Brihat-samhita, and the later Agamic and Pauranic works 
in respect of architectural and sculptural matters, as well as most 
of the avowedly architectural texts, are debtors to the Manasara ; 
while it is a debtor itself in respect of the same matters to the Vedic 
and the early Epic works, as also to the early polytechnical treatises 
(like the Kautiliya-Artha-Sastra and the Kamandakiya), and to the 
avowedly architectural works of the thirty-two authorities mentioned 
in the Manasdra, which might have existed till its own time. Besides, 
it cannot but have been based on the actual observation and measure- 
ment of extant architectural and sculptural objects ; in this matter 
lies the special importance of the Manasara. 

An objection may be raised here. It is possible that those works 
which are stated above to have been debtors to the Manasara might 
have been influenced directly by those which are asserted to have 
been the creditors to the Mdnasdra. Such an objection, however, 
can be easily disposed of. The Manasara, in whichever period of history 
it is finally placed, has become a standard work on architecture and 
sculpture, because we have seen, firstly, it is the largest of its kind ; 
secondly, its treatment of the subjects is most exhaustive ; and, thirdly, 
in it the subject-matter has been scientifically classified and sys- 
tematized. When there is a standard work existing, it 1s natural 
and highly probable that those who treat the subject rather casually 
or less exhaustively, should draw upon it instead of going to me 
original sources, except in some special instances. For the ordinary 


208 


INDIA AND ABROAD THREE STYLES 


meanings or synonyms of a word we generally consult a standard 
dictionary, rather than attempt to trace the history, phonology, 
morphology, and semasiology of the word. An analogical instance 
may perhaps make the point clearer. Panini’s grammar makes 
mention of some nineteen pre-existing grammatical works, and it 
has been placed by later scholars somewhere in the fourth or third 
century before Christ. Like the works on rhetoric and prosody, 
grammars cannot be prepared without consulting the existing litera- 
ture, because the sole business of these works is to generalize certain 
regulating features of literature. The methods of the pioneers of 
law books, as well as the grammar, the Alankdrasastra, and the 
Silpa-Sastra, must have been inductive. Panini, as he acknowledges 
generously, has been indebted to his predecessors ; it is also clear 
from his work that he himself has consulted the preceding Vedic 
and post-Vedic literature. It is true that grammars have been 
prepared after Panini also. But when Panini’s grammar reached 
the status of a standard work, his rules and regulations were 
naturally followed in the later literature. The later grammarians 
also must have been influenced by Panini. In the field of grammar 
and literature Panini’s grammar is, therefore, the regulating and 
controlling standard work. In the same way, and more clearly and 
significantly, it seems to me, the Manasdara occupies a unique position 
in literature, both architectural and non-architectural. 


209 n 


CHAPTER VI 
THE MANASARA AND VITRUVIUS 


As HAS ALREADY been pointed out in the Preface, the name Manasarq 
is of ambiguous significance. It is, however, clear from the preced- 
ing chapters that the text bearing the title Manasara is a standard 
treatise on Indian architecture. It is divided into seventy chapters 
each bearing a distinct title. In 1834, in his Essay on the Architecture 
of the Hindus, Ram Raz referred to the first few chapters of the 
Manasara from a single fragmentary manuscript to which he had 
access. Since then several manuscripts have been discovered ; but, 
owing to some serious difficulties stated in the Preface, nobody had 
made any attempt to deal with this huge text in any way for a period 
of 80 years till the present writer undertook in 1914 to edit it for the 
first time. This, the first edition, is based on all the eleven available 
manuscripts which are written in five different scripts in a language 
branded as ‘barbarous Sanskrit.’ Figures, sketches, or illustrations 
of any kind are absolutely wanting in all these manuscripts. The 
various scripts and the provenance of the manuscripts,t however, 
indicate that the Manasara was known and used in all provinces of 
ancient India.? Its extensive popularity has been further estab- 
lished by its unique position in literature, discussed in Chapter V. 
Vitruvius is the name of a Roman architect. His treatise, on 
which, in a sense, aJl European architecture is based, seems to have 
been composed 25 years before the Christian era. ‘The materials 
for a life of Vitruvius are only to be found in his own treatise. Among 
the ancient authors he is merely mentioned by Pliny as one of those 
writers from whom he compiled, and by Frontinus, in his treatise 
on Aqueducts, as the first who introduced the Quinarain measure.’ 
The title of Vitruvius’s treatise is lost, if it originally had one. 
The editio princeps, printed at Rome in or about 1486, bears no 
title. The unique position of this treatise is, however, sufficiently 
clear from the fact that since its first appearance in the fifteenth 
century there have been, till 1807, forty-two editions of the work, 
practically in all the European languages. There are seventeen 
editions in Latin, eleven in Italian, two in Spanish, six in French, 


1 For details, see Manasara (text), Vol. III, Preface, 


. xi-xviii. 
* See pp. 254-256, and notes, at 


210 


INDIA AND ABROAD EXTENT AND POPOLARITY 


four in German, and two in English. It is divided into ten books, 
which, too, do not bear any titles. Each book contains a number 
of chapters varying from seven to twenty-two. The chapters also 


1 See Gwilt (XV—XXV) for fuller details of the following : 
Latin editions— 

1486—Editio princeps, printed at Rome by George Herolt begins, without title, 
Sulpitius lectori salutem. Polenus says, ‘ There are but few errors in this edition.’ 

1496—Printed at Florence. According to Fabricus the orthography of this 
edition is more correct than in the preceding one. 

1497—The name of the editor does not appear. With a few slight variations 
this is little more than a reprint of the Florence edition. In this the chapters of 
the first book are differently divided from those of the two former editions. 

1511—This is the first illustrated edition. It contains many wood-blocks and 
figures. Jocundus, the editor, altered the text of the two former editions in many 
places. 

1513—The figures in this edition are the same as in the preceding, but con- 
siderably reduced and more imperfectly kept. 

1522—This is a reprint of the preceding edition with the same blocks for the 
figures. 

1523—This was probably edited by Will. Hayon of Lyons. This is a counter- 
part of the Giunta edition. Some of its figures are taken from the first Italian 
edition of 1521, which is noticed hereinafter. 

1542—The text is nearly the same as that of Jocundus. The figures of the 
wood-blocks are partly borrowed from the Giunta edition and partly from the 
Italian edition of 1521. 

1550—The text is the same as that of 1543 edition. But it contains notes of 
Philander which were first published at Rome in 1 544. 

1552—* Philander himself superintended this edition, chiefly following the Giunta 
text, which he collated with several MSS. The wood-blocks are better than in any 
preceding edition.’ : 

1567—Darbaro in this seems to have mostly followed Philander’s edition of 1 552- 

1586—Harwood says that ‘the editor of this edition was Jo. Tornaesious, 
junior, and that it is more correct, though less elegant, than that produced by the 
father in 1552.’ 

1649—With commentary of Meibomius on those chapters relating to musical 
notation. This was the best edition of the author produced at that time. ‘De Laet 
professes to follow the text of Philander’s edition but neither was this accurately 
done, nor were the notes of Philander, nor the Lexicon of Baldus, given entire, as 
the title would import.’ i 

1758—By Marchese Berardo Galiani at Naples, with an Italian version noticed 
under the Italian editions. Harwood says that this is ‘ a fair and valuable edition.’ 

1800—The text of this edition is of little value, nor its plates well executed. It 
has notes appended, but it contains the glossary in five languages. 

1807—It contains notes. im ; ‘ 

1807—In the same year another edition was published. The second and third 
volumes are devoted to commentaries on the text. It contains, however, no plates. 
‘ This is the best edition of the author which has appeared.’ 

Italian editions— . ‘ ' ‘ 

1521—This is one of the earliest and rarest versions of Vitruvius. It was trans- 
lated, with the assistance of Benedict Jovius, by Caesar Caesarianus, who was one 
of the architects of the Cathedral of Milan. One of the plates contains a plan and 
two sections of this Cathedral. 


21y 


MANASARA AND VITRUVIUS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


have not any proper titles. The treatise deals with both civil and 
military architecture. The rules respecting military engines, “ now 
incomprehensible, but doubtless in his time sufficiently clear,’ are 
laid down in the last book. The treatment of civil architecture 
includes both temples and residential buildings. ‘That he should 
have met with opposition from his brethren is quite consonant with 
later experience, for the rabble of ignorant builders, and artisans, 
and draughtsmen are of the same class as those that flourished sub- 
sequently to Vitruvius.’ From this remark of Gwilt it appears that 
Vitruvius was induced to ‘ write his treatise with a view to assisting 
the uneducated professional architects’? who, like those of India, 
depended solely on the knowledge handed down to them from their 
equally uneducated forefathers. 


1524—This is a repetition of the preceding edition, but without the notes of 
Caesar Caesarianus. 

1535—TLhis is copied from the preceding edition, but the index is not quite so 
copious. 

i 536—A translation of the first five books. Perugia. 

1550—With Barbaro’s commentary. 

1567—With Barbaro’s commentary. 

1584—Similar to the preceding edition. 

1629—Very similar to the preceding edition. 

1641—Little differing from the preceding. 

1758—In Napoli, accompanied with the Latin text. 

1790—Another edition by Galiani, similar to the preceding, but without the 
Latin text. 
Spanish editions— 

1602—Without plates. 

1787—Large folio, with plates. 
French editions— 

1547—First version in French, Jan Martin, Paris. 

1572—A reprint of the preceding, Cavellat, Paris. 

1618—Printed from the two preceding editions by Jean de Tournes at Geneva. 

1673—Translated by Perrault. Figures are numerous and well executed. 

1684—With plates, best of Perrault’s editions. 

1816—With ‘plates, Bruxelles. 
German editions— 

1548—With plates on wood-blocks cut by Erard Schaen. 

1575—A repetition of the preceding, Basil. 

1614—Another repetition with a little different title. 
> 1796—With a life of Vitruvius in the first volume. This edition contains many 
illustrations of the author. 
English editions— 

1771—Translated from the original Latin by Newton, London. 

1791—Second volume with many plates. It exhibits defective knowledge of 
Latin, but the notes are good. 

Latterly a portion was translated by Wilkins. 

After Joseph Gwilt’s translation there have been several others in English. 


212 


INDIA AND ABROAD NUMBER AND TITLES OF CHAPTERS 


: Certain points of similarity between the Manasara and the treatise 
of Vitruvius are so striking that they raise a presumption that the 
two works are in some way connected with each other.’ This thesis! 
is proposed to be illustrated in this chapter. 

Practically seven-tenths of both the works is avowedly architec~ 
tural. 

Out of the seventy chapters of the Manasdra the first fifty deal 
with architecture proper, and out of the ten books of Vitruvius the 
first seven deal with the same subjects. 

The remaining twenty chapters of the former are devoted to sculp- 
ture, and the remaining three books of the latter deal mostly with 
war instruments, machines, and engines. Of the similar seven- 
tenths in both the works, the names of many chapters, and the 
contents, too, in most instances, are the same. 

The Mdnasara opens, following the usual custom, with a prayer to 
the Creator Brahma and touches upon the origin and development of 
the science of architecture, from Siva, Brahma, and Vishnu, through 
Indra, Brihaspati, and Narada, to the class of Rishis called Mana- 
sara, and concludes the introduction with a list of the chapters. 

Vitruvius, too, opens with a prayer to his patron, Caesar, and 
acknowledging his obligations to Caesar’s father and sister, concludes 
with a proposal to give an account of the magnificent edifices Caesar 
had built, and to develop all the principles of the art. 

The next chapter (II) in the Manasdara deals with two distinct 
subjects, the system of measurement (mdnopakarana), and the requisite 
qualifications of an architect (Js2lpi-lakshana). 

The corresponding chapter is marked ‘I’ instead of ‘II’ by 
Vitruvius, because the preceding chapter goes without any number- 
ing, as it is called Introduction. This, the present chapter, deals 
exactly like the corresponding chapter in the Mdnasdra with two 
distinct subjects under the heads, ‘ what architecture is,’ and ‘of the 
education of an architect.’ The former of these two subjects has 
again been treated in the following chapter, namely III, of the 
Manasara, and is noticed below. The striking similarity in the 
training demanded of the architect by the two authorities may be 
noticed here. , 

According to Vitruvius ‘an architect should be ingenious, and apt 


1 Submitted as such to Leiden University by the present writer. 
213 


MANASARA AND VITRUVIUS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


in the acquisition of knowledge. He should be a good writer, a 
skilful draughtsman, versed in geometry and optics, expert at 
figures, acquainted with history, informed on the principles of 
natural and moral philosophy, somewhat of a musician, not ignorant 
of the sciences, both of law and physic, nor of the motions, laws 
and relations to each other, of the heavenly bodies.’ The absolute 
necessity for these qualifications has been very satisfactorily elabo- 
rated by Vitruvius. 

In the Manasara artists are first divided into four classes. Together 
they form the guild of architects, each an expert in his own depart- 
ment, but possessing a general knowledge of the science ofarchitecture 
asa whole. They consist of the chief architect (sthapaiz), the 
draughtsman or the designer (sittra-grahin), the painter (vardhaki), 
and the joiner (sitra-dhara). 

According to the Manasara the chief architect is expected to be well 
versed in all the sciences. He must possess a knowledge of all the 
Vedas and all the Sastras. He must be proficient in law, mathematics, 
history, geography, painting, draughtsmanship, mechanics, and deep 
‘in the ocean of the science of architecture. He must be very 
learned, meritorious, patient, and dexterous, a champion, of large 
experience, of industrious habits, and of noble descent, full of 
resource, and capable of application to all kinds of work. He must 
possess a wide outlook, bold temperament, and self-control. He 
must be above committing errors. He must have a good name and 
be faithful to his employers (Jit. friends). He must be endowed with 
all the qualifications of a supreme managing director. He must 
not be deformed or have any disease or disability ; he must also 
be free from the seven vices, namely, hunting, gambling, daydream- 
ing, blackmailing, addiction to women, etc. 

A similar set of qualifications is also demanded of each of the other 
three artists, but the sitra-grahin is expected to possess an expert 
knowledge of draughtsmanship, the vardhaki of painting, and the 
sitradhara of carpentry. 

The utility or the possibility of so many attainments in a single 
person has not been expressly discussed in the Manasara. But Vitru- 
vius has submitted an interesting explanation. 

It is familiar to everybody that for success in any profession in life 
one must be clever, industrious, honest and generous. It is also 
easily understood that an architect, who has got to do both manual 


Q14, 


INDIA AND ABROAD 


NUMBER AND TITLES OF CHAPTERS 


and brain work, must not be deformed, and must be free from any 
disease or disability. 

According to Vitruvius he is required to be a good writer also, 
because an architect is to commit to writing his observations and 
experience, in order to assist his memory. Drawing is employed in 
representing the forms of his designs. Geometry, which forms a part 
of mathematics, affords much aid to the arhitect; to it he owes the use 
of the right line and circle, the level and the square, whereby his 
delineations of buildings on plane surfaces are greatly facilitated. 
Arithmetic estimates the cost and aids in the measurement of the 
works; this, assisted by the laws of geometry, determines those 
abstruse questions wherein the different proportions of some parts to 
others are involved. The science of optics enables him to introduce 
with judgment the requisite quantity of light according to the 
aspect. Unless acquainted with history, he will be unable to account 
for the use of many ornaments which he may have occasion to 
introduce. For history (the expression furdna is used in Indian 
literature), which implies ‘ ancient’ or mythological legends that are 
as a rule depicted in the buildings of a nation. There are, however, 
other uses of history for’an architect. 

‘Moral philosophy,’ says Vitruvius, ‘ will teach the architect to be 
above meanness in his dealings and to avoid arrogance, and will make 
him just, compliant, and faithful to his employer; and what is of the 
highest importance, it will prevent avarice gaining an ascendancy 
over him; for he should not be occupied with the thoughts of filling 
his coffers, nor with the desire of grasping everything in the shape of 
gain, but by the gravity of his manners and a good character, should 
be careful to preserve his dignity.’ These precepts of moral philo- 
sophy are prescribed by our Indian authorities almost in the same 
terms. We have seen above that the architect is required to be of 
noble descent, pious, and compassionate. He must not be malicious 
or spiteful. He must be content and free from greed. He must be 
truthful and possess self-control. He must be above the seven vices. 
He must be faithful to his employer. He must not have excessive 
desire for gain. He must be of good behaviour and generous 
enough to forgive his rivals. ti ‘ 

‘The doctrine of physic is necessary to him in the solution of 
various problems, as for instance, in the conduct of water, whose 
natural force, in its meandering and expansion over flat countries, 


215 


MANASARA AND VITRUVIUS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


is often such as to require restraints, which none know to apply but 
those who are acquainted with the laws of nature.’ This matter, too, 
has been more exhaustively discussed in various chapters of the 


Manasara. as : " 
‘Music assists him in the use of harmonic and mathematical propor- 


tion” In these matters, the Mdnasara is rather too elaborate ; in most 
individual cases nine proportions have been suggested. and the selec- 
tion of the right proportion and harmony has been made dependent 
on the application of the six formulas, which are treated in a very 
technical manner, based on mathematics. According to Vitruvius, 
music is, moreover, absolutely necessary in adjusting the force of the 
pallistae, catapultae, and scorpions, in whose frames are holes for the 
passage of the homotona, which are strained by gut-ropes attached to 
windlasses worked by hand-spikes. Unless these ropes are equally 
extended, which only a nice ear can discover by their sound when 
struck, the bent arms of the engine do not give an equal impetus 
when disengaged, and the strings, therefore, not being in equal states 
of tension, prevent the direct flight of the weapon. A knowledge of 
music is specially useful to the architect in building theatres, lecture 
rooms, and such other halls where the spread of sound is taken into 
particular considertion. Both Vitruvius and the Mdnasdra are 
equally enthusiastic in speaking about it. The former further says 
that the architect ‘would, moreover, be at a loss in constructing 
hydraulic and other engines if ignorant of music.’ ‘Skill in physic 
enables him to ascertain the salubrity of different tracts of country, 
and to determine the variation of climates, for the air and water of 
different situations, being matters of highest importance, no buildins 
will be healthy without attention to those points.’ A very elaborate 
account of the selection of sites and the examination of soil is given 
in the Mdnasara and other architectural treatises.1 The salubrity of 
the tracts is minutely ascertained with reference to the site where a 
village, town, fort, palace, temple, or dwelling-house is to be built. 
The soil is examined with regard to its contour, colour, odour, 
features, tastes, and touch. The level of the ground, as well as the 
characteristic vegetation of the site, as pointed out above, are 
also minutely examined. 


1 Brihat-samhita, Garga, Visvak, Kasyapa, Vastu-ratnavali, Vasishtha-samhila, Vastu- 
pradipa, Narada, Griha-karika, Bhrigu, Silpa-dipaka, Bhavishya-Purdna. See quotations 
from these works under Bhi-pariksha in the writer’s Encyclopaedia. 


216 


INDIA 4ND ABROAD SIMILAR PRELIMINARY CHAPTERS 


‘Law should be an object of his study, especially those parts of it 
which relate to party-walls, to the free course and discharge of the 
eaves waters, to the regulation of cesspools and sewage, and to 
window lights. The laws of sewage require his particular attention, 
30 that he may prevent his employers from being involved in law suits 
when the building is finished. Contracts, also, for the execution of 
the works, should be drawn up with care and precision, because, 
when without legal flaws, neither party will be able to take advan- 
tage of the other.’ 

Law, as explained by Vitruvius, is not mentioned in so many words 
in the list of accomplishments given in the Vastu-Sastras quoted above. 
But most elaborate instructions are given in the Arthasastra and other 
treatises on party-walls, the sewage system, and on windows and other 
openings + 

‘Astronomy instructs him in the points of the heavens, the laws of the 
celestial bodies, the equinoxes, solstices, and courses of the stars ; all of 
which should be well understood in the construction and proportions of 
clocks.’ In the Vastu-Sastras dialling is an important subject; but 
astronomy, which is always mixed up with astrology, has been drawn 
upon particularly with regard to the auspicious moment invariably 
observed in almost all matters. 

Vitruvius has added an explanatory note on the expression “all 
sciences’ of which the architect is required to have sufficient know- 
ledge. This explanation will indeed throw a clear light upon a similar 
expression, sarva-Sdsira, used by the Indian authorities. But for the 
following note of Vitruvius, we might have taken the term sarva-sastra 
as an exaggeration which is very often found in Sanskrit literature to 
imply nothing more than a general knowledge. 

‘Perhaps, to the uninformed mind,’ begins Vitruvius, “it may 
appear unaccountable that a man should be able to retain in his 
memory such a variety of learning; but the close alliance with each 
other of the different branches of science will explain the difficulty. 
For as a body is composed of various concordant members, s0 does 
the whole circle of learning consist in one harmonious system. 

‘On this account, Pythius, the architect of the noble temple of 
Minerva at Priene, says, in his commentaries, that an architect should 
have that perfect knowledge of each art and science which is not ave 
acquired by the professors of any one 1n particular.’ This seeme 


1 See the writer’s Encyclopaedia, under Faladvara and Vatdyana. 
217 


MANASARA AND VITRUVIUS HINDU ARCHITECTURE In 


rather too much to Vitruvius, so he asks ‘how can it be expected 
that an architect should equal Aristarchus as a grammarian, yet should 
he not [sic] be ignorant of grammar. In music, though it be evident 
he need not equal Aristoxenus, yet he should know something of it, 
Though he need not exceed, as Appeles in painting, nor as Myron 
or Polycletus in sculpture, yet he should have attained some pro- 
ficiency in these arts.’ 

‘Thus, also, in the other sciences,’ concludes Vitruvius, ‘it is not 
important that pre-eminence in each be gained, but he must not, 
however, be ignorant of the general principles of each. For in such a 
variety of matters it cannot be supposed that the same person can 
arrive at excellence in each, since to be aware of their several niceties 
and bearings, cannot fall within his power. . . . Wherefore Pythius 
seems to have been in error, forgetting that art consists in practice 
and theory. Theory is common to, and may be known by, all, but 
the result of practice occurs to the artist in his own art only. The 
physician and musician are each obliged to have some regard to the 
beating of the pulse, and the motion of the feet, but who would apply 
to the latter to heal a wound or cure a malady? So, without the aid 
of the former, the musician affects the ears of his audience by modula- 
tions upon his instrument. The astronomer and musician delight in 
similar proportions, for the positions of the stars, which are quartile 
and trine, answer to a fourth and fifth in harmony. . . . Throughout 
the whole range of art there are many incidents common to all. 
Practice alone can lead to excellence in any one. That architect, 
therefore, is sufficiently educated whose general knowledge enables 
him to give his opinion on any branch when required to do so. Those 
unto whom nature has been so bountiful that they are at once geo- 
metricians, astronomers, musicians, and skilled in many other arts go 
beyond what is required of the architect,’ 

Further observations are perhaps unnecessary with a view to reiter- 
ating the striking similarities between the Mdanasara and Vitruvius 
on this point. This series of similarities between the injunctions of the 
two standard works on such an important matter as the training of 
the architect, the very soul of architecture, seem to have been due to 
something more than mere coincidence. 

The next chapter (III) in the Manasara, called Vastu-prakarana, 
defines vastu or habitation and divides it into four classes—ground, 
building, conveyance, and couch (dhara, harmya, yaéna, and paryanka). 

218 


IN. D IA AN. D AB ROAD SIMILAR PRELIMINARY CHAPTERS 


Chapter IV, called Bhi-pariksha or examination of soil, deals with 
the site where a village, town, fort, palace, temple, or dwelling is to be 
built, and examines the soil thereof with regard to contour, colour, 
odour, features, taste, touch ; the elevation of the ground; and the 
luxuriance of certain plants, trees, and grasses. 

Chapter V; called Bhitmi-sarngraha or selection of site, deals further 
with the soil before it is finally selected for a building site. 

The next chapter (VI) considers the orientation of buildings, and 
recommends that a building should preferably face the east or north- 
east, and never the south-east. Reasons have not been discussed fully, 
beyond stating that this is auspicious or that is inauspicious. Inci- 
dentally, the principles, mechanics, and details of dialling have been 
exhaustively discussed. 

The following chapter (VII) discusses the design or division of the 
site selected for a village, town, or house, into a number of plots. 
Thirty-two schemes are distinguished, each of which is divided into 
squares of various numbers. 

Following the usual custom, this introductory section concludes with 
a chapter (VIII) on offerings to various deities. In this matter, too, the 
chief architect takes a leading part. 

The corresponding chapter (II) of Vitruvius is called, ‘ Of those 
things on which architecture depends.’ It deals with the fitness (ordi- 
natio) and arrangement (dispositio), also proportion, uniformity, con- 
sistency, and economy, and is divisible into three heads, ichnography, 
orthography, and scenography, which considered. together constitute 
design. 

The next chapter (III) is called ‘Of the different branches 
(building, dialling, and mechanics) of architecture,’ and the chapter 
following (IV) is named ‘ Of the choice of healthy situation,’ which 
deals with the climatic conditions and elevations of the building site, as 
well as with its aspects or orientation. Unlike in the Manasara, the 
consideration of fog, rain, heat, and cold, which are peculiarities of 
the European countries, has been given prominence here. The expla- 
nations of aspects recommended are satisfactory. ‘A city on the sea- 
side,’ it is stated, ‘exposed to the south or west will be insalubrious, 
for in summer mornings a city thus placed would be hot, at noon it 
would be scorched. A city, also, with a western aspect would even at 
sunrise be warm, at noon hot, and in the evening of a burning tem- 
perature. Hence the constitution of the inhabitants of such places, from 


219 


MANASARA AND VITRUVIUS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


such continual and excessive changes of the air, would be much 
vitiated.’ After citing opinions of physicians andot hers, and supporting 
by illustrations, it is further stated, ‘ When, therefore, a city is built in 
a marshy situation near the sea coast, with a northern, north-eastern 
or eastern aspect, on a marsh whose level is higher than the shore 
of the sea, the site is not altogether improper ; for by means of sewers 
the waters may be discharged into the sea; and at those times, when 
violently agitated by storms, the sea swells and runs up the sewers, it 
mixes with the water of the marsh and prevents the generation of 
marshy insects ; it also soon destroys such as are passing from the higher 
level, by the saltness of its water to which they are unaccustomed.’ 
The frequent mention of the seaside, it is needless to point out, is due 
to the situation of the prominent Italian cities on the sea shore, and of 
Rome in particular, which was the object of special study to Vitruvius. 

Vitruvius has also elaborately treated the subject of dialling in as 
many as four chapters (Book IX, Chapters I, II, VIII, IX). 

In this matter of dialling, as in many others, Vitruvius, of course, 
differs in certain details from the Manasara. For instance, regarding 
the principles of dialling, each of the twelve months is, in the Manasara 
(VII), divided into three parts of ten days each, and the increase and 
decrease of shadow are calculated in these several parts of the different 
months. Vitruvius (Book IX, Chapter VIII), on the other hand, 
discusses ‘the principles of dialling and the increase and decrease 
of the days,’ not the shadow thereof, in the different months. 

In both these works, therefore, this introductory section comprises 
exactly eight chapters, which bear similar titles and deal with the 
same subjects practically in the same way. 

Town-planning is the next topic treated in both the works, and it 
covers exactly two chapters both in Vitruvius (Book I, Chapters VI 
and VII), as well as in the Manasdra (Chapters IX and X). 

The Mdnasara describes the subject under two heads, Grama-lak- 
shana and Nagara-vidhana, and three categories, village, town, and fort. 
Villages are divided into eight classes, called dandaka, sarvatobhadra, 
nandyavarta, padmaka, svastika, prastara, karmuka, and chaturmukha; each 
of these, as the names indicate, represents a particular design and lay- 
out. Towns are also divided into eight classes : rajadhani, nagara, pura, 
nagart, Kheta, kharvata, kubjaka, and pattana. These refer more to the 
situation and distribution of buildings than to their shapes or designs. 

Forts are first divided into eight classes : Sibira, vahinimukha, sthaniya, 


220 


INDIA AND ABROAD SIMILAR PLANS OF TOWNS 


dronaka, samviddha or vardhaka, kolaka, nigama, and skandavara. Accord- 
ing to their situation, they are further classified into mountain fort 
(giri-durga), forest fort (vana-durga), water fort (jala-durga), chariot 
fort (ratha-durga) gods’ fort (deva-durga), clay fort (panka-durga), 
and mixed fort (misra-durga) The mountain fort is subdivided 
into three classes, according as it is built on the top of the mountain 
in the valley, or on the mountain slope. : 
According to the Manasara there is, however, not much difference 
between a village, a town, and a fort. The town is the extension of a 
village. And the fort is in many cases nothing more than a fortified 
town. There seems to be only this difference that a fort is chiefly 
meant for purposes of defence, while a village or town is mainly 
‘ntended for habitation and commerce. But the village scheme seems, 
all the same, to have originated from the plan of the military camp. 
Each village is surrounded by a wall made of brick or stone. It is 
supported by ramparts. Beyond this wall there is a ditch, broad and 
deep enough to cause serious obstruction in the event of an attack on 
the village. There are generally four main gates at the middle of the 
four sides, and as many at the four corners. Inside the wall there is a 
large street running all round the village. Besides, there are two other 
large streets, each of which connects two opposite main gates. They 
intersect at the centre of the village, where a public temple or hall is 
generally built in which the villagers may meet. The village is thus 
divided into four main blocks ; each of these is again subdivided into 
many blocks by streets, which are always straight and run from one 
end to the other of the main block. The two main streets crossing at 
the centre have houses only on one side, facing the street. The ground 
floor of these houses on the main streets consists of shops. ‘The street 
which runs round the village, also, has houses only on one side. These 
houses are mainly public buildings, such as schools, colleges, libraries, 
guest-houses, and liquor saloons. All other streets generally have rest- 
dential buildings on both sides. The houses, high or low, are always 
uniform in make. The drains and sewers are made towards the slope 
of the village. Tanks and ponds are dug in all the inhabited parts 
and located in such quarters as can conveniently be reached by a large 
number of inhabitants. The temples of public worship, as well as the 
public commons, gardens, and parks, are similarly located. People of 
the same caste or profession are generally housed in the same quarter. 
The habitation of the dead-body burners (chandalas), as well as the 
Q21 


MANASARA AND VITRUVIUS HINDU ARCHITECTURE In 


places for cremation, are located outside the village wall, to the north- 
west in particular. The temples of fearful deities, such as Chamunda, 
are also located outside the wall. 

A town may be situated from east to west or from north to south 
according to the position it occupies. ‘There should be one to twelve 
large streets in a town. It should be built near a river or a mountain, 
and should have facilities for trade and commerce with foreigners, 
It should be furnished with walls, moats, ditches, gates, drains, parks, 
commons, shops, exchanges, temples, guest-houses, colleges, etc. The 
king and his court usually reside in a town, and traders and forum are 
essential elements in its population. 

Forts are also surrounded with strong walls and large and deep 
ditches. The wall is made of brick, stone, and similar lasting materials. 
It is at least eighteen feet in height and its thickness at the base is at 
least nine feet. The wall is provided with watch-towers. 

Fortified cities are specially honoured with the residences of the king, 
the princes, priests, ministers, and military officers. There are also 
humbler dwellings, as well as courts of justice, arsenals, traders’ booths, 
shops, work-houses for artisans, various assembly halls, dancing halls, 
ligour saloons, and gambling halls. 

According to Vitruvius (Book I, Chapter V) : 

“When we are satisfied with the spot fixed on for the site of the 
city, as well as in respect of the goodness of the air, as of the abundant 
supply of provisions for the support of the population, the communi- 
cations by good roads, and river or sea navigation for the transport 
of merchandize,! we shoud take into consideration the method of con- 
structing the walls and the towers of the city. From the exterior face of 
the wall, towers must be projected from which an approaching enemy 
may be annoyed by weapons ; from the ambrasures of those towns, 
right and left, an easy approach te the wall must be provided 
against ; indeed they should be surrounded by uneven ground, and 
the roads leading to the gates should be winding and turned to the 
left from the gates. By this arrangement the right side of the 
attacking troops, which are not covered by their shields, will be open 
to the weapons of the beseiged.’ 

‘The thickness of the walls should be sufficient for two armed men 


1 x : 4 . 

1 Cf. Chanakya’s saying: ‘Residential houses should not be built in such 
places where there are no rich men, no learned men, no kings, no rivers, and no 
physicians,’ 


222 


INDIA AND ABROAD SIMILAR PLANS OF TOWNS 


to pass each other with ease. The walls ought to be tied, from front 
to rear, with many pieces of charred olive wood ; by which means the 
two faces, thus connected, will endure for ages. . . .’ 

‘The distance between each tower should exceed an arrow’s flight. 
The walls will be intercepted by the lower parts of the towers where 
they occur, leaving an interval equal to the width of the tower, which 
space the tower will consequently occupy. The towers should be made 
either round or polygonal. A square tower is a bad form on account of 
its being easily fractured at the quoins by the battering ram ; whereas 
the circular tower has this advantage, that, when battered, the pieces 
of masonry whereof it is composed being cuneiform, cannot be driven 
in towards their centre without displacing the whole mass. Nothing 
tends more to the security of walls and towers than backing them 
with walls or terraces; it counteracts the effects of rams as well as 
of undermining. .. .’ 

‘Jn the construction of ramparts, very wide and deep trenches are 
to be first excavated, the bottom of which must be still further dug out 
for receiving the foundation of the wall. This must be of sufficient 
thickness to resist the pressure of earth against it. Then, according 
to the space requisite for drawing up the cohorts in military order on 
the ramparts, another wall is to be built within the former, towards 
the city. The outer and inner walls are then to be connected by 
cross-walls, disposed on the plan after the manner of the teeth of a 
comb or a saw, so as to divide the pressure of the filling-in earth into 
many and less forces, and thus prevent the walls from being thrust out.’ 
The materials are stated to be ‘what are found on the spot, such 
as square stones, flint, rubble, stones, burnt or unburnt bricks ’ 
(Book I, Chapter V). : 

‘ The plan of the city should not be square, nor formed with acute 
angles, but polygonal, so that the motions of the enemy may be open 
to observation’ (Book I, Chapter V). : : 

‘The lanes and streets (of which no details are given) of the city 
should be set out, the choice of sites for the convenience and use of the 
state remains to be decided on; for sacred edifices, for the forum, and 
for other public buildings. If the place adjoin the sea, the forum 
should be seated close to the harbour ; if inland, it should be ma the 
centre of the town. The temples of the gods, protectors of the city, as 
those of Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva, should be on. some; coees 
which commands a view of the greater part of the city. The temple 


223 


MANASARA AND VITRUVIUS HINDU ARCHITECTURE In 


of Mercury should be either in the forum, or, as also the temple of Isis 
and Serapis, in the great public square ; those of Apollo and Father 
Bacchus near the theatre. If there be neither amphitheatre nor 
gymnasium, the temple of Hercules should be near the circus. The 
temple of Mars should be out of the city, in the neighbouring country, 
that of Venus near to the gate. According to the revelations of the 
Hetrurian Haruspices, the temples of Venus, Vulcan, and Mars should 
be so placed that those of the first be not in the way of contaminating 
the matrons and youth with the influence of lust ; that those of Vulcan 
be away from the city, which would consequently be freed from the 
danger of fire, the divinity presiding over that element being drawn 
away by the rites and sacrifices performing in his temple. The 
temple of Mars should be also out of the city, that no armed frays 
may disturb the peace of the citizens, and that this divinity may, 
moveover, be ready to preserve them from their enemies and the perils 
of war. The temple of Ceres shall be in a solitary spot out of the 
city, to which the public are not necessarily led but for the purpose of 
sacrificing to her. This spot is to be reverenced with religious awe 
and solemnity of demeanour by those whose affairs lead them to visit 
it’ (Book I, Chapter VII). 

Tt should be observed that in the Mdnasara eight distinctive plans 
of villages and some twenty-five varieties of commercial cities and 
military forts have been described with all details. In town-planning 
the Indian authority has recommended almost all the suitable designs, 
square, rectangular, and polygonal. But Vitruvius recommends only 
the polygonal. In the matter of the disposition of temples within the 
city wall and outside, the two authorities very strikingly correspond. 
In both the treatises the fear-inspiring deities are similarly located 
outside the city wall. 

The following seven chapters (XI to XVII) in the Manasdra serve 
the purpose of a preamble to the subsequent chapters dealing with 
buildings.1 

The first of these (XI) is named Bhitmi-lamba, or height of storey, in 
the Manasara. It is defined in the Kamikagama as the dimensions of the 
four sides, The contents of the chapter in the Manasara describe in 
detail the measurement of length, breadth, and height of buildings of 


1 OF these seven preliminary cha i a 
) pters the twelfth, on foundations (garbha-nydsa); 
should have been in the Place of the eleventh, which treats of aes Co} 
buildings (bhimi-lamba), as in Vitruvius’s treatise. 


224, 


INDIA’ AND ABROAD SIMILAR FORMS AND SPECIES 
OF BUILDINGS 


one to twelve storeys, assigned to persons of different ranks. The five 
forms, namely, square, rectangular, round, octagonal, and oval, are 
prescribed for buildings of different classes, jai, chhanda, vikalpa, and 
abhasa. ‘These shapes are equally applicable to religious, military, 
and residential buildings. A palace of five to twelve storeys is stated 
to suit the emperor or the universal monarch, highest in rank among 
the nine classes of kings. Residences of one to three storeys are assigned 
to the heir-apparent and the chief feudatories, and so on. 

The title of the corresponding chapter of Vitruvius (Book VI, Chap- 
ter III) is more significant. It is called, ‘Forms of houses suited to 
different ranks of persons.’ As in the Manasara, buildings are divided 
exactly into five classes, though the criteria of classification are 
different. It is stated (Book III, Chapter II) that ‘there are five 
species of temples, whose names are Pycnostylos, that is, thick set with 
columns ; Systylos, in which the columns are not so close ; Diastylos, 
where they are still wider apart ; Areostylos, when placed more distant 
from each other . . . ; Eustylos, when the intercolumnation . . . is 
of the best proportion.’ ‘The conditions of temples are distin- 
guished,’ it is further stated (Book III, Chapter 1), ‘ by their different 
forms. First, that known by the appellation, In Antis, then the 
Prostylos, Peripteros, Psuedodipteros, Dipteros, and Hypae-thros.’ 
‘Circular temples are constructed of which some are Monopteral 

. others are called Peripteral’ (Book IV, Chapter VIII). 

As regards the distribution of buildings it is stated (Book IV, Chap- 
ter III) that ‘temples of the Doric order are erected to Minerva, 
Mars, and Hercules, on account of whose valour their temple should 
be of masculine proportions and without delicate ornaments. The 
character of the Corinthian order seems more appropriate to Venus, 
Flora, Proserpine, and Nymphs of Fountains, because its slenderness 
elegance and richness, and its ornamental leaves surmounted by 
volutes, seem to bear an analogy to their dispositions: A medium 
between these two is chosen for temples to Juno, Diana, Bacchus, and 
other similar deities, which should be of the Ionic order, tempered 
between the severity of the Doric and the slenderness and delicacy 
of the Corinthian order’ (Book I, Chapter II). As regards secular 
buildings, it is laid down that ‘ the houses of bankers and receivers of 
the revenue may be more commodious and elegant than those of per- 
sons of middling condition in life. For advocates and men of literature 
houses ought to be still handsomer and more spacious, to suit the 


225 0 


MANASARA AND VITRUVIUS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


reception of persons on consultations. But for nobles, who in bearing 
honours and discharging the duties of the magistracy must have much 
intercourse with the citizens, princely vestibules must be provided, 
lofty atria and spacious peristylia, groves, and extensive walks, finished 
in a magnificent style. . . . If, therefore, houses are erected thus 
adapted to the different classes of society . . . there will be nothing 
to reprehend, for they will be suitable to their destination.’ «I haye 
thus described,’ concludes Vitruvius, ‘the proportions of town resj- 
dences as I promised. I shall now proceed to those of houses in the 
country ® (Book VI, Chapter VIII). 

It is needless to point out that the subject-matter of this chapter is 
virtually the same in both the authorities. The small differences are 
due to the local conditions and requirements of the two different 
countries. 

The next chapter (XII), called Garbha-nydsa in the Manasara, deals 
with the foundations whereupon buildings, villages, and tanks are 
built. The foundation is excavated in the ground best suited for a 
structure to the depth of a man’s height with uplifted arms. It is laid 
down that the bottom of the pit thus excavated ‘must be rocky or 
watery, in other words, it must reach rock or water. It implies that the 
best soil for receiving foundation, when it is not erected on water, is 
rock, gravel, or closely pressed sandy earth. 

The depth of the foundation-cave is equal to the height of the base- 
ment. The four corners and sides, built of brick or stone, are equal. 
This cave is filled with water and ten kinds of earth, thus the earth 
from an ant-hill, a crab-hole, etc., is placed at the bottom and closely 
pressed and hardened by means of wooden hammers shaped like the 
elephant’s foot. Portions of certain plants are then deposited on the 
four sides, the root of the blue lotus to the east, the root of the white 
lotus to the south, and so on. Upon these are placed grains of ten kinds 
of cereals, such as phaseolus mungo, phaseolus radiatus, dolichos untflorus, 
seasamum indicum, and so on. The vault is built thereon, the details of 
which need hardly be repeated here. Upon such ‘strong foundations, 
the strength whereof varies according to the weights of the buildings 
above, various structures are constructed.’ 

‘When we are satisfied,’ says Vitruvius (Book I, Chapter V), ‘ with 
the spot fixed on for the site of the city . . . their foundations should 
be carried down to a solid bottom, if such can be found, and should 
be built thereon of such thickness as may be necessary for the proper 


226 


INDIA AND ABROAD SIMILAR FOUNDATIONS AND COLUMNS 


support of that part of the wall which stands above the natural level 
of the ground. They should be of the soundest workmanship and 
materials, and of greater thickness than the walls above.’ Importance 
of solid ground is emphasized and it is again stated (Book III, Chapter 
IIT), ‘if solid ground can be come to, the foundations should go down 
to it and into it, according to the magnitude of the work, and the 
substraction be built up as solid as possible. Above the ground of the 
foundation, the wall should be one-half thicker than the column it is 
to receive, so that the lower parts which carry the greatest weight, 
may be stronger than the upper part. . . . Nor must the mouldings 
of the bases of the columns project beyond the solid. Thus, also, 
should be regulated the thickness of all walls above ground. The 
intervals between the foundations brought up under the columns, 
should be either rammed down hard, or arched, so as to prevent the 
foundation piers from swerving. If solid ground cannot be come to, 
and the ground be loose or marshy, the place must be excavated, 
cleared, and either elder, olive, or oak piles, previously charred, must 
be driven with a machine as close to each other as possible and the 
intervals between the piles filled with charcoal. The heaviest founda- 
tions may be laid on such a base.’ 

These details are also strikingly similar in both the authorities 
and this similarity seems to be due to something more than mere 
coincidence. 

The next four chapters (XIII to XVI) in the Manasdra deal with 
the column and its different parts, the pedestal, base, shaft, and 
entablature, and their various mouldings. Vitruvius also treats the 
subject in exactly four chapters (Book III, Chapter III, Book IV, 
Chapters I to III). But the titles of the chapters are a little different. 
They are named in the Mdnasara, upapitha or pedestal (XIII), adhisthana 
or base (XIV), stambha or shaft (XV), and prastara or entablature 
(XVI). Vitruvius calls them, ‘columns and their ornaments’ (Book 
III, Chapter III), ‘ origin of the three sorts of columns and the Corin- 
thian capital’ (Book IV, Chapter I), ‘ornaments of columns’ (zbid, 
Chapter II) , and ‘ Doric proportions’ (ibid, Chapter IIT). 

Vitruvius, in the Doric, Corinthian, and Tuscan orders, makes no 
mention of pedestals, and in the Ionic order he seems to consider 
them rather as a necessary part in the construction of a temple 
than as belonging to the order itself (Book V, Chapter VII). In the 
Manasdra twelve kinds of pedestals are described with detailed 


2217 


MANASARA AND VITRUVIUS HINDU ARCHITECTURE In 


measurements of the various mouldings of each pedestal. A com- 
parison of these, with similar details of pedestals, quoted in full in the 
writer’s Encyclopaedia from European authorities other than Vitruvius, 
makes it clear that the Indian pedestals surpass the Graeco-Roman 
in variety, beauty of proportion, and the richness of ornaments. 

As regards the base, also, there is in the Manasara a large variety 
of types, sixty-four in number, described in detail with their mould- 
ings and ornaments. A comparison of the details gathered together in 
the writer’s Encyclopaedia will show that the Indian bases and pedestals 
are made more systematically and afford a greater variety of propor- 
tions than those of the Greco-Roman orders. In European orders 
the forms and dimensions of both base and pedestal are fixed by 
invariable rules with respect to the orders in which they are employed, 
while in the Indian orders the choice is left to the option of the 
architects. 

There are, however, more similarities between the Indian and the 
Greco-Roman entablatures, consisting of four parts, the capital, 
architrave, frieze, and cornice. But the massiveness of the Indian 
entablature offers a striking contrast to the lightness of the Grecian. 
This is shewn by a comparison of details given in the writer’s Encyclo- 
paedia of eight kinds of Indian and some five kinds of Greco-Roman 
entablatures. 

But the point to be clear about is whether or not there is some 
fundamental resemblance between the Indian and the Greco-Roman 
column as a whole. This is a crucial point, because the column in 
a building is stated by authorities to be the regulator of the whole 
composition, and it is the one feature of the ancient architecture 
which “illustrates its rise and progress as well as its perfection and 
weakness.’ 

Like the five Greco-Roman orders, called Doric, Ionic, Corinthian, 
Tuscan, and Composite, columns in ancient India were also divided 
into five classes or orders. 

In the Manasara they are called Brahma-kania, Vishnu-kanta, Rudra- 
kanta, Siva-kanta, and Skanda-kanta. These divisions are based on the 
general shapes. With respect to dimensions and ornaments, they are 
called Chitra-karna, Padma-kanta, Chitra-skambha, Palika-stambha, and 
Kumbha-stambha. 

In the Maitsya-Purdna, the Brihat-samhité, and the Kirana-tantra they 
are called Ruchaka, Vajra, Doi-vajra, Pralinaka, and Vritta. In the 


228 


INDIA AND ABROAD SIMILAR COLUMNS AND PILLARS 


Suprabhedagama the names of the five orders are Sri-kara, Chandra-kanta, 
Saumuhkya, Priya-darsana, and Subhankari. This last one is expressly 
stated to be the Indian composite order, being a compound (misrita) 
of Saumukhya and Priya-darsana, exactly like the Greco-Roman 
Composite order, which is a compound of Corinthian and Ionic. 

Between the European and the Indian columns that is a point 
of difference. In the Greco-Roman orders, the names cof the five 
orders do not vary, while in India the names of the five orders have 
varied in the various treatises referred to above. It is true, all the 
same, that the criteria of divisions are essentially the same in all 
authorities. The variation of the names of the five orders can perhaps 
be explained. The names of the Greco-Roman orders, according 
to Vitruvius and other European authorities referred to in the 
Encyclopaedia of Architecture by Gwilt, are geographical.” 

In India, on the other hand, the names of the orders were based 
on the shapes of the columns. And as the Indians are compara- 
tively more religious and sentimental than critical in temperament 
and imagination, they chose mythological and poetical names 
according to the spirit of the times when these various works were 
composed. Thus in the Mdnasara we see the orders bearing the 
names of mythological deities, Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra, Siva, and 
Skanda ; as well as the poetical names like Chitra-karna (variegated 
ear), Chitra-skambha (variegated capital), Padma-kania (graceful like 
lotus), Kumbha-stambha (of jug-shaped capital), and Palika-stambha 
(shaped like a measuring pot). In the Agama, the names are more 
poetical : Srikara (beautifying), Chandra-kanta (graceful like the moon), 
Saumukhya (of a charming face), and Subhankart (auspicious). In 
the Purana, the Brihat-samhita, and the Kirana-tantra, the names com- 
bine beauty and utility: Ruchaka (pleasing), Vritta (round and 
dignified), Vaira (beautiful and solid like the club), Dvi-vajra (doubly 
so), and Pralinaka (firmly attached). 

With regard to the names and functions of the component parts of 
the column the variation is a little less marked. The number of 
these subservient parts, called mouldings and common to all orders, 
is very significant. Thus in the Manasdra, which, of almost all the 


1 For references see above, pp. 201-202 and the footnotes, and the writer’s Encyclo- 


paedia, under Stambha. 
2 See p. 202, note 7. The contents of the four following paragraphs are discussed 
in more detail elsewhere (p. 201-206), and may be referred to. 


229 


MANASARA AND VITRUVIUS : HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


treatises, deals separately and exhaustively with the pedestal, the 
base, the column or shaft, and the entablature, mention is made, 
in connexion with the pillar, of five mouldings apparently of the 
shaft. They are called bodhika, mushti-bandha, phalaka, tatiké, and 
ghata. But the total number of mouldings, when the base, pedestal, 
and entablature are also taken into consideration, is forty-seven. The 
Suprabhedagama describes two sets of seven mouldings, one set referring 
to the column of the main building and the other to that of the pavi- 
lion. They are called respectively danda, mandi, kantha, kumbha, 
phalaka, vira-kantha and potika ; and bodhika, uttara, vdjana, mirdhika, 
tulad, jayanti, and tala. 

This increasing number of mouldings has reached the significant 
number of eight in the Matsya-Purdna, the Brihat-samhita, and the 
Kirana-tantra, and bears the very same eight names—vdhana, ghata, 
padama, utiaroshtha, bahulya, hara, tulad, and upa-tuld. 

The component mouldings of the Greco-Roman orders are also 
exactly eight in number, and, like the five orders themselves, their 
names have remained invariable ever since their introduction, though 
most of them have been given more than one name. They are called 
(1) the ovolo, echinus, or quarter round ; (2) the talon, ogée, or 
reversed cyma ; (3) the cyma, cyma-recta, or cymatium ; (4) the torus; 
(5) the scotia or trochilos ; (6) the cavetto, mouth, or hollow ; (7) 
the astragal ; and (8) the fillet, listel, or annulet. 

Some of the eight mouldings of the Indian order can be identified, 
with a reasonable certainty, with the corresponding mouldings of 
the Greco-Roman order. Padma, for instance, implies lotus (petal), 
and cyma also suggests the same thing. Uvtaroshtha, literally the lower 
lip, and the cavetto, mouth, or hollow, are apparently the same. Hara, 
meaning chain, seems to imply the same object as the torus, bead, 
or astragal. Ghafa means a pot, it may correspond to the ogée, talon, 
or reversed cyma. Vahana is that which supports anything, and the 
abacus also serves the same purpose, so they may correspond to each 
other. Tula and upa-tuld, otherwise called vdjana and uttara, seem to 
correspond to the fillet, listel, or annulet. 

The proportionate measurement of the columns is another im- 
portant point of comparison. The details are discussed in the writer’s 
Encyclopaedia. The first Indian order is six diameters high, the second 
seven diameters, the third eight diameters, the fourth nine diameters, 
and the fifth ten diameters high. 


230 


INDIA AND ABROAD SIMILAR COLUMNS AND PILLARS 


‘ Concerning the proportions of columns,’ says Ram Raz (page 
38), ‘the second sort of column in the Hindu arthitecture may be 
compared with the Tuscan, the third with the Doric, the fourth with 
the Ionic, and the fifth with the Corinthian or Composite pillar.’ 
He further adds that ‘ there are other columns in the Indian archi- 
tecture, not only one diameter lower than the Tuscan, but one 
to two diameters higher than the Composite.’ The same is also the 
case with the European columns. ‘The orders and their several 
characters and qualities,’ says Gwilt (2538), ‘do not merely appear 
in the fixed species of columns into which they have been subdivided, 
but are distributed throughout the edifices to which they are applied.’ 

‘ Both the Indian and Grecian columns are diminished gradually 
in their diameter from the base to the summit of the shaft, a practice 
which has never been observed in the Egyptian; on the contrary, a 
diametrically opposite rule has been observed in their shafts, which 
are made narrower at the bottom than at the top. The proportion 
in which the diminution at the top of the columns of the two former 
(Indian and Greco-Roman) is made seems to have been regulated 
by the same principle, though not by the same rule. The general 
rule adopted by the Hindu architects in this respect is that the thick- 
ness at the bottom, being divided into as many parts as there are 
diameters in the whole height of the column, one of these parts is 
invariably diminished at the top, but in the Grecian and Roman 
architecture the diameter of the upper part of the shaft, in a column 
of fifteen feet in height, is made one-sixth less than its thickness at 
the base, and in a column of fifty feet, the diminution is one-eighth. 
The higher the columns are, the less they diminish, because the 
apparent diminution of the diameter in columns of the same propor- 
tion is always greater according to their height, and this principle is 
supposed to have been discovered with greater scientific skill, and is 
adduced as one of the proofs of the highly refined taste of the Greeks ; 
but we observe that precepts derived from the same principle have 
been taught and practised in India from time immemorial.’ 

The point at issue is not the actual identification. The striking 
similarities in the names of the mouldings, like padma or cyma, hara 
or bead, or in the names of orders like the Misrita or Composite, may 
sometimes be attributed to inexplicable coincidence. But in view of 
other striking similarities between Vitruvius and the Manaséra, 
such as the classification of orders into exactly five, and the division 


231 


MANASARA AND VITRUVIUS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


of subservient parts, called mouldings, common to all the orders, into 
eight, and also the proportionate measurement varying equally from 
six to ten diameters and tapering almost in the same way, there 
would seem to have been something more substantial than mere 
coincidence. An influence, direct or indirect, of the one upon 
the other, seems highly probable. I venture to think, further, that 
there might have been a relation of indebtedness between the two 
authorities. 

The concluding chapter (XVII) of this section in the Manasara 
deals with joinery. No separate treatment has been accorded by 
Vitruvius to this subject. 

The next chapter (XVIII) in the Manasara is a summary of details 
concerning buildings of various storeys and kinds described in Chapters 
XIX to XXX. The following chapters (XX XI to XXXVI) deal with 
attached buildings of various descriptions and requirements. Chapter 
XXXVII refers to the first entry into a newly-built house. Doors 
are separately described in two chapters (KXXVIII and XXXIX), 
so also the royal palaces and courts are described in Chapters XL to 
XLIT. Cars and chariots, couches and thrones, are treated in the 
next three chapters (KLIII to XLV). Arches are separately described 
in Chapter XLVI, so also the theatre (madhya-ranga) is treated in 
Chapter XLVII. And this architectural portion of the Manasara 
ends with the description of ornamental trees (Chapter XLVIII), 
crowns (Chapter XLIX), and ornaments and articles of furniture 
(Chapter L).1 

The sculptural portion of the work (Chapters LI to LXX) deals with 
the art of carving and measuring images. This portion practically 
comprises illustrations of the tdla measures. Vitruvius, as we shall 
show presently, has not treated the subject separately ; he has mixed 
it up with the architectural description. 

With regard to these subjects the comparison between the Méana- 
sdra and Vitruvius need not be lengthy. Both these authorities in 
matters of detail must necessarily differ from each other, even if one 
were translated from the other, because the local conditions and 
national requirements are entirely different regarding not only resi- 
dential buildings but also temples. On the broad lines of methods 
and principles, however, the comparison can be briefly continued in 
the expectation of fruitful results. 


1 For more details, see Pp. 112-137, 
232 


INDIA AND ABROAD SIMILAR COMPOUNDS AND COURTS 


Thus, in the Mdanasara, the whole compound of the house is divided 
into five courts (Chapter XXXI), each of which is furnished with a 
gate-house (Chapter XXXIII), and a large number of detached 
buildings are also built within each court (Chapters XXXII, XXXVI, 
XIX to XXX). 

Vitruvius also divides the compound into exactly five courts, which 
are, however, not used simultaneously (Book VI, Chapters III to VII). 
‘There are,’ says Vitruvius, ‘ five species of courts, which receive 
their names from their forms. The Tuscan, the Corinthian, the 
Tetrastylon (with four columns), the Displuviatum (open at the top), 
and the Testudinatum (roofed).’ In the Manasdra also, it should be 
noted, five technical names have been given to these five courts, 
antar-mandala (innermost court), anta-nihdra (the second court), 
madhya-nthava (the middle court), prakdra (the fourth court), after 
which the chapter has been named and which is stated to be first 
introduced in the Manasdra, though as many as seven courts are des- 
cribed in the Mrichchhakatika. The fifth one is called maha-maryada, 
or extreme boundary. Thus, in the Manasdra, the courts receive their 
names from their situation, and not from their forms. Forms are 
discussed in the Manasara also. In fact the treatment of this subject, 
like all others, is by far the more exhaustive in the Mdnasara. Even 
the five gate-houses of the five courts have been treated at great 
length in a separate chapter (XXXIII) and given five technical 
names, dvara-fobha (beauty of the gate), belonging to the antar-mandala 
or the first court, dvdra-fala (gate-mansion, of the second court), 
dvara-prasada (gate-palace, of the third court), dvdra-harmya (gate- 
edifice, of the fourth court), and mahd-gopura (great gate-house, of 
the fifth court).? 

Within these courts, buildings of different requirements have been 
similarly distributed by the two authorities. For instance, in the 
Manasara, Chapter XXXVI is called Griha-mana-sthana-vinyasa, literally 
meaning, ‘location and measurement of house,’ and Chapter XXXII 
is called Parivara-vidhana, meaning ‘the buildings for the members 
of the family’ (of gods). The corresponding chapters (Book VII, 
Chapters, I, I, IX) are named by Vitruvius, G situation of buildings 
according to the nature of different places,’ ‘ proportions of private 
buildings to suit the nature of the sites,’ and ‘ proportions of houses 
in the country.’ Detached buildings, situated both within the 


1 far further details, see p. 117-119. 


233 


MANASARA AND VITRUVIUS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


compound and outside, have been-described in the Manasara in two 
very long chapters (XXXIV and XXXV) called Mandapa and Salg. 
The term mandapa is used to imply, first, a house or pavilion set up in 
a village or on the bank of a sea, river, tank, or lake ; secondly, all 
the detached buildings within a compound, which is divided into 
five courts ; lastly, it implies various sorts of rooms in a temple or 
residential building. Sala also implies almost the same kinds of build- 
ings, but they are more commodious and pompous mansions 
arranged in rows varying from one to ten, and their forms and 
twelve storeys are taken into special consideration. Chapter VI (Book 
I), called by Vitruvius, ‘ distribution and situation of buildings within 
the walls,’ may be compared with Mandapa and Sala@ with respect 
to general principles and methods. But Vitruvius’s treatment of the 
subject is comparatively brief. The brevity of his account of indi- 
vidua: buildings also becomes obvious when the ‘ arrangement and 
parts of Grecian houses,’ and ‘interior of the cell and the arrangement 
of Pronaos,’ described in two small chapters (Book VI, Chapter X, 
and Book IV, Chapter IV) are compared with the exhaustive 
description of similar subjects detailed in some thirteen chapters 
(XVIII to XXX) in the Manasara. 

Doors are separately described by both the authorities. Vitruvius 
calls the chapter ‘ Proportions of the doors of temples’ (Book IV, 
Chapter VI). In the Manasdara the subject is treated under two 
chapters (XXXVIII and XXXIX) called Dodra-sthina (location of 
doors) and Dodra-mana (measurement or proportions of doors). 
Both the authorities classify doors under three species. Vitruvius 
calls them Doric, Ionic, and Attic, and in the Manasara they are 
called Chhanda, Vikalpa, and Abhasa. Here is a striking point of 
similarity with respect to an important omission. In the Mdnasara 
the ati class always goes with the other three classes mentioned here. 
Vitruvius has also omitted Corinthian and Tuscan, which generally 
go with Doric and Ionic. In the Manasara the height of the door 
is stated to be, as a general rule, twice its breadth. ‘ Their width,’ 
says Vitruvius, ‘is found by dividing the height into two parts and 
a half, and taking one and a half for the width below.’ Single- 
folded as well as double-folded doors are mentioned in the Manasara. 
Vitruvius has referred also to four-fold doors. Indian doors are 
decorated with foliated and floral ornaments, as well as with the 
images of deities. ‘These doors,’ Says Vitruvius, ‘are not to be 


234 


INDIA AND ABROAD SIMILAR PROPORTIONS OF 


DOORS AND BUILDINGS 
inlaid (cerestrota), nor in two folds, but single-folded, and to open 
outwards.’ According to Vitruvius, doors are generally constructed 
in the middle of the front wall. But according to the Mdnasara 
doors may also be constructed sometimes, not in the centre of the 
frontage, but on either side of the middle. 

Windows are not separately described by Vitruvius. But in the 
Manasara a long account of them has been given at the end of Chapter 
XXXII; similarly an account of staircases, omitted by Vitruvius, 
is found in the Manasara at the end of Chapter XXX. No separate 
mention has also been made by Vitruvius of arches, to which subject 
an entire chapter (XLVI) has been devoted in the Manasara. 
Vitruvius has left out the accounts, given in the Mdnasdra, of cars 
and chariots (Chapter XLIII), couches (XLIV), thrones (XLV), 
crowns (XLIX), ornaments of the body and articles of house 
furniture (L), as well as the ornamental tree (XLVITI). 

In the Manasara, on the other hand, a very brief reference is made 
to an object resembling a theatre, to which Vitruvius has devoted 
several chapters (Book V, Chapters III to TX). Vitruvius has not 
treated separately the royal palaces found in the Manasara (Chapters 
XL to XLII) nor does the Manasdra contain any account of his 
special buildings, such as ‘ Forum and Basilica,’ ‘ Treasury, Prison, 
and Curia,’ ‘Harbours and other buildings in water’ (Book V, 
Chapters I, II and XI). Building materials, though frequently 
mentioned, are not described in the Mdnasara under separate 
chapters. Vitruvius has devoted some eight chapters (Book II, 
Chapters III to X) to the subject of building materials, namely, bricks 
(compare the Manasara, Chapter XII, last part), sand (Mdnasara 
XII), lime (Manasara LI), Pozzolona stone quarries (Mdnasara XV), 
timber (Manaséra XV) and firs, called Supernas and Infernas, and 
the Appennines. 

Vitruvius deals with painting and preparations of colours in the 
larger part of a book (VII) of fourteen chapters. This subject, as 
well as Vitruvius’s books (VIII to X) on instruments, machines and 
engines, have no place in the Manasara. In place of these subjects, 
some twenty chapters (LI to LXX) of the Manasara have been 
devoted to sculptural matters, to which only the following brief and 
casual reference has been made by Vitruvius (Book III, Chapter I). 

‘In truth they (symmetry and proportion) are as necessary to the 
beauty of a building as to that of a well-formed human figure, which 


235 


MANASARA AND VITRUVIUS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


nature has so fashioned, that the face, from the chin to the top of the 
forehead, or to the roots of the hair, is a tenth part of the height of the 
whole body. From the chin to the crown of the head is an eighth 
part of the whole height, and from the nape of the neck to the crown 
of the head the same. From the upper part of the breast to the roots 
of the hair a sixth, to the crown of the head a fourth. A third part 
of the height of the face is equal to that from the chin to the under- 
side of the nostrils, and thence to the middle of the eyebrows the 
same, from the last to the roots of the hair, where the forehead ends, 
the remaining third part. The length of the foot is a sixth part of the 
height of the body. The forearm a fourth part. The width of the 
breast a fourth part. Similarly have the other members their due 
proportions by attention to which the ancient painters and sculptors 
obtained so much reputation. . . .’ 

‘The navel is naturally placed in the centre of the human body, 
and if, in a man lying with his face upward and his hands and feet 
extended, from his navel as the centre, a circle be described, it will 
touch his fingers and toes. It is not alone by a circle that the human 
body is thus circumscribed, as may be seen by placing it within a 
square. For measuring from the feet to the crown of the head, and 
then across the arms fully extended, we find the latter measure equal 
to the former ; so that the lines at right angles to each other, enclosing 
the figure, will form a square.’ 

‘If nature, therefore, has made the human body so that the differ- 
ent members of it are measures of the whole, so the ancients have, 
with great propriety, determined that in all perfect works each part 
should be some aliquot part of the whole ; and since they direct that 
this be observed in all works, it must be most strictly attended to in 
temples of the gods, wherein the faults as well as the beauties remain 
to the end of the time.’ 

This is all about the defects, to which in the Manasara practically 
a whole chapter (LXIX), one of the two concluding chapters of the 
work, is devoted. It is called Anga-dishana (lit., defects of the 
limbs). In both the authorities the subject is discussed in con- 
nexion with sculptural objects, but curiously enough, defects and 
consequent penalties concerning images and idols have been entirely 
left out both by Vitruvius and the Manasara. Both the authorities 
have referred to the subject as concerning buildings only. This 
sort of similarity can hardly be due to mere coincidence. 


236 


INDIA AND ABROAD _ simiLar SCULPTURAL MEASURES, LINGUISTIC 
DEFECTS AND MYSTERIOUS TITLES 


‘Jt is worthy of remark,’ says Vitruvius, ‘that the measures 
necessarily used in all buildings and other works are derived from 
the members of the human body, as the digit, the palm, the foot, the 
cubit, and that these form a perfect number, called by the Greeks 
Téleios.’ Phonetically this sounds like what the Indians call Talas, 
and there is a similarity in meaning also.t In the above quotation 
Vitruvius has briefly referred to only the eighth variety with which 
the male human figure is measured also by the Indian authorities. 
Details of the éala measures given in the writer’s Encyclopaedia need not 
be repeated here. It should also be noted that, in both the authorities, 
the face from the chin to the top of the forehead is taken as the 
standard of all the tala measures, which number ten in the Mdnasara.? 

The last point of comparison between Vitruvius and the Manasara 
is in respect of the linguistic style. We have already pointed out that 
Silpa-Sastras, or architectural treatises in India, were written in a very 
peculiar style. Sanskrit scholars like Dr. G. Bihler and Sir R. G. Bhan- 
darkar have truly branded it as the ‘ most barbarous Sanskrit.’ This 
remark really means that all possible sorts of violation of the rules of 
grammar and rhetoric have been committed in the language of the 
Silpa-sastras. Such a mixed dialect ‘reads exactly like a piece from 
a stupid school-hoy’s exercise. It is also confirmed,’ contmues 
Dr. Biihler, ‘ by numerous analogies, such as the language of janma- 
patras (horoscopes) of the badly educated Joshis (astrologers) 
mentioned by Dr. Bhandarkar, the books of masons and carpenters, 
which have the rules for building houses in most barbarous Sans- 
krit, and many modern inscriptions composed by clerks.’* One of 
the theses presented by the writer before the Leiden University, and 
passed in his favour by that learned assembly after long discussion, 
bec ungrammatical style of Sanskrit revealed in the branch of 
literature of which the Mdnasara is a representative, 1s due to the 
want of literary proficiency on the part of the professional architects 
who seem to have been the authors of it.” With this the following 
apology, for ungrammatical style, of Vitruvius may very fruitfully be 
compared : 

ree secti = ing end, and idla is derived from tala 
ss Tis act om el man dat (a 3g a0 0) 


d the writer’s Encyclopaedia, under Talamana. ; 
ae poe God © Sriatior further details and illustrations from various 
. cr) ° 


sources, sce the writer’s Indian Architecture (1927), Appendix and pp. 211-214. 


237 


MANASARA AND VITRUVIUS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


‘I beseech you, O Cesar,’ says Vitruvius, ‘and those who read 
this my work, to pardon and overlook grammatical errors ; for I write 
neither as an accomplished philosopher, an eloquent rhetorician, 
nor an expert grammarian, but as an architect : in respect, however, 
of my art and its principles, I will lay down rules which may serve 
as an authority to those who build, as well as to those who are already 
somewhat acquainted with the science’ (Book I, Chapter I). 

I cannot help thinking that if the writers of the Si/pa-Sastras generally, 
and the author of the Manasara in particular, were conscious of the 
nature of their style they would certainly have added to their treatises 
an apology like that of Vitruvius. 

There is yet another curious similarity between Vitruvius and the 
Manasara. It is regarding the titles of both the works. Both are 
hidden in mystery. Vitruvius’s work bears practically no title. 
It is called by his translators ‘The architecture of Marcus Vitruvius 
Pollio.’ It has been pointed out in the preface that the term ‘ Mana- 
sara’ also admits of various interpretations. For a sage, Manasara 
is a very unfamiliar name. No such sage is mentioned in the various 
branches of Sanskrit literature except in this newly discovered 
Vastu-Sasira. A king of Malwa, however, bore this name. As a deriva- 
tive name, Manasdra, meaning essence of measurement, and suitable 
for the title of a work like this, has some philological resemblance 
with mensuration. The derivative meaning of the term ‘ Vitruvius’ is 
uncertain. The point, however, to which attention is invited, is the 
curious similarity between the treatise of Vitruvius and the Ménasara 
in respect of the uncertain signification of their titles. 

There is also an uncertainty lurking over the ages in which the 
architecture of Vitruvius and the Mdnasdra were composed. ‘ It is 
likely that’ the former ‘ was composed twenty-five years before the 
Christian era.’ This conjecture is based mainly on Vitruvius’s 
mention of his patron, Julius Cesar. But there is no mention cf 
anybody under whose patronage the Manasdra might have been 
composed. 

The similarities so briefly outlined will be more convincing to those 
who have carefully studied both Vitruvius and the Manasara. 

Those who are, however, inclined to think like myself and refuse 
to attribute all these similarities to mere chance, will be anxious to find 
out the connecting link between the two authorities. The question 
was put before the Oriental Conference held in Calcutta in January, 


238 


INDIA AND ABROAD SIMILAR UNCERTAIN 
PERIODS OF ORIGIN 


1922, to point out the link, about the existence of which there seems 
no reasonable doubt. A learned discussion was then held on the 
paper, but no suggestion has yet been received on this point. 

There is the expedition of Alexander the Great to explain the 
Grecian influence on the Gandhara sculpture. The ‘ Questions of 
Menander’ may perhaps stand for the title Milinda-patha. There is, 
again, the Romaka-siddhanta to indicate the influence of the Roman 
astronomy upon the Indian fFyotisha-Sastra, which had, however, 
already established itself as one of the six essential limbs of the Veda, 
the most ancient extant lore of human learning. Similarly, the art of 
building, which is intimately connected with all living beings, was 
developed at the early Vedic period, even earlier than that at 
Mahenjo-daro. But the Silpa-sdstra, which is but an analysis and 
commentary of the art, was necessarily evolved much later. There 
are reasons to think that the Manasara is not the first work in which 
the ‘essence of measurement and the system of proportions * were 
codified in the form of Sastra, though this may be the standard 
treatise. 

Until the missing link is found, it is, however, possible to think 
that there was some work or works, or some floating traditions, which 
influenced both treatises. It will, therefore, serve no useful purpose 
in trying to further develop the nature of the various similarities 
between Vitruvius and the Manasdra. I would not, therefore, hazard 
an opinion at present as to the precise nature of the connexion 
between these two treatises. There are arguments which might support 
a claim of priority on behalf of either work. I shall be content, for the 
present, if the learned world be convinced that there are undeniable 
similarities between the two standard works and that these affinities 


do not seem to be accidental. 


239 


CHAPTER VII 
AGE OF THE MANASARA 


IN TRYING TO establish, in the preceding chapter, a relation of influ- 
ence between Vitruvius and the Mdnasdra, one of my objects was to 
find out a landmark for the latter, as the date of the former is known 
approximately. 

‘From the fragments of inscriptions relative to the Vitruvia family 
found in the neighbourhood of Farmiae (the present Mola di Gaeta), 
is has been presumed, without a great stretch of probability, that it 
was in this territory Vitruvius was born. The age in which he lived 
’ was doubtless between the time of the death of Julius Cesar and the 
battle of Actium, though some have assigned it to the reign of Titus, 
But his omission of the mention of a great number of magnificent 
buildings, erected after the time of Augustus, and his especial mention 
of the theatre of Pompey as the only one of stone, sufficiently prove 
that such a conjecture is not warranted by circumstances. The 
dedication, moreover, points to Augustus as the patron [of Vitruvius] 
and the incident of C. Julius, the son of Masanissa, who was born in 
the army of Julius Cesar, having lodged with him, as related in the 
third chapter of his eighth book, seems clearly to indicate the time 
of his existence. It is likely that the following treatise (of Vitruvius) 
was composed when he was advanced in life, and that it was presented 
to his patron after he had assumed the title of Augustus, that is, 
twenty-five years before the Christian era, inasmuch as he speaks 
of a temple erected to Augustus, in his Basilica at Fano. 

The other landmark may perhaps be supplied by the following 
thesis admitted by Leiden University. ‘There seems to have been 
a relation of indebtedness between the Manasara, on the one hand, 
and on the other hand, the architectural portions of the Agni-Purdna, 
the Garuda-Purana, the Matsya-Purdna, and the Bhavishya-Purana, the 
Kamikagama, the Suprabhedagama, and the Brihat-samhita.’ The 
reasons for and the arguments in favour of such a belief have been 
discussed in great detail elsewhere,? and need not be repeated here. 
For further scrutiny and more minute comparison, the Brihat-samhita 


1 Professor Gwilt, Preface, xii, 2 See pp. 186-209. 
240 


INDIA AND ABROAD MANASARA AND BRIHAT-SAMHITA 


of Varahamihira, one of the nine gems! at the court of a mythical 
Vikramaditya, is selected. Professor Kern has given a probable date, 
A. D. 550, to the Brihat-samhita. The ages of the Puranas and the Agamas 
mentioned in the thesis are more conjectural. 

Although primarily not a treatise on architecture, the Brihat- 
samhita has devoted five chapters? (LIII, LVI, LVII, LVIII and 
LXXIX) to this art. Three of these, called Vastu-vidya or the science 
of architecture, Prdsdda-lakshana or the description of temples under 
twenty types, and Sayydsana-lakshana or the description of bedsteads 
and couches, deal with architecture proper, and the other two, 
called Vajralepa or the first casting of image, and Pratima-lakshana or 
the description of images, briefly refer to sculpture. The following 
similarities between the Manasdra and Brihat-samhita may be noticed : 


Manasara | Brthat-samhita 


Origin and develop- 
ment of the science 


of architecture .. ii ef} TEU, ae 
Objects of architec- 
ture .. - III | LIII, 2-3 (details differ). 
Testing of oil ne IV-V | LIII, 95-97, 85-92, 115-117. 
Site plan se VII | LIII, 42-69, 83-84. 
Offerings to deities VIII | LITI, 99-100. 
Dimension of storeys XI | LIII, 4-26, LVI, 29-30. 
Columns ba XV | LITI, 27-30, 112-113, 121-123. 
Temple-buildings .. XVIII | LVI, 3-8 (site), 9 (ground), 
10-16 (general), 17-19 (twenty 
types). 
One-storeyed build- 
ings .. Be XIX | LVI, 23, 26. 
Five-storeyed build- 
ings .. do XXIII | LVI, 27. 


L eqeqeahe: TITHISTAASTS HAT OATASHACHT SAT: | 
gard azrefirfett esa: ware weit 4 acefata faarer il 
—(safrtrarret, Kern, B. S. 17). 
i i be untenable 
tence of these gems as contemporaries has been held to’ : 

ee to Kern’s edition published by Royal Asiatic Society, London. 
In some other editions, for instance, in that of Sudhakara Dvivedi, Benares, Vikrama 
era 1658, these chapters have got a different numbering. Our references to the Byihat- 
sarihita are mostly to Kern’s edition. 


241 p 


AGE OF THE MANASARA HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


Manasara | Brihat-samhita 


Six-storeyed _ build- 


ings .. on OUINE | IEMA o32 
Seven-storeyed 

buildings aa XXV | LVI, 24. 
Hight-storeyed build- 

ings .. = XXVI | LVI, 21. 
Ten-storeyed build- 

ings .. PP OOV ALT ELV 15.20; 
Halls and pavilions XXXIII, | LIII, 118. 

XXXIV 


Situation and mea- 
surements of 
houses ee L |) EIDE 70: 
Ceremonial _ entry 
into a new y-built 
house .. XXXVII | LITI, 125. 
Situation and mea- 
surement ofdoors XXXVIII, | LIII, 26-27, 70-82 LVI, 10, 
XXXIX 12-16. 


Phalli .. oh LIT | LVIII, 53-55. 
Images of female 
deities Bs LIV | LVIII, 56. 
Images in general .. LXIV | LVIII, 31-52, 57-58 (ends 
abruptly). 
Largest type of ten- 
tala measures .. LXV | LVIII, 4-30. 
First casting of 
images ws LXVIII | LVIII, 1-8. 


An elaborate discussion has already been introduced regarding 
the types of buildings’ and the five orders.2 Two other points of 
special and general importance may be elaborated here. 

The site-plans are treated under twenty-four schemes in the 
Manasara. Of these, descriptions in detail are given of the eighth 
and the ninth schemes, which consist respectively of sixty-four and 
eighty-one squares. In the Manasara it is stated, by way of explana- 
tion, that these two plans were much in use. Varahamihira also 
has described only these two plans. In the Brihat-samhitd there is not 


1 
See pp. 187-197. 2 See pp. 201-206. 
242 


INDIA AND ABROAD BRIHAT-SAMHITA, BHAVISHYA- 
PURANA AND MATSYA-PURANA 


the slightest reference to the other twenty-two schemes. As is usual 
with him, Varahamihira has changed the names or location of the 
squares here and there. Another striking point of similarity is that 
only the square plans are described in both the treatises, although in 
the Manasara five shapes or forms are given to the buildings. Vara- 
hamihira also has referred to the round type of buildings. Corres- 
ponding to these shapes there should be the ground plans also. But 
these are unexpectedly missing in the Manasara and also in the Brihat- 
samhita. The details of round or circular plans and also of triangular 
plans, both consisting of eighty-one squares, have been quoted from 
a mythical Bharata-muni by Bhattotpala, a commentator of the Brihat- 
samhita. So, in matter of such a striking omission also, Varahamihira 
seems to have faithfully followed the Mdanasdra, Garga, or whatever 
else his sources might have been. 

The other point proposed to be discussed here is that concerning 
the sources cof the Brihat-samhita in architectural matters. Varaha- 
mihira says that the science of architecture has come down to him 
from Brahma (Kamalabhi) through several generations of sages. 
He further admits that all matters relating to architecture are taken 
from Garga, and small portions of the architectural treatises of 
Manu and others have been put in from memory.* 

The names of the sages passed over here may be gathered together 
from casual references. Mention is made of Vasishtha, Maya, Visva- 
karman, Bhaskara and Nagnajit.2 The Purdpas are not mentioned 
by Varahamihira. But some of the Purdnas are no doubt earlier 
than the Brihat-samhita.* 


Loraraoantad aftd TATE | 

ait afeetad afer aay UI 

ararfefataetaarit Taft ari | 

acdenfa sft mara wetsfrpre: N—(Byihat-samhita, LVI, 30-31). 
2 aaRETS afarss: arate atareraratarrey I—LVIIL, 8. 


naafadt aie fasat astarsara: \—LVII, 8. 
PHISH, AACTSNTT UT | 
adeetat aa aad faerie —LVII, 29. 


wanfaareadt TTA WeackataTay |—LVITT, 52. 
aed apafrad Treaaea arf | —LVIM, 15. 
arafaar gy Agareer atlas waay | —VIIL, 4. 
3 See pp. 277-278. 
243 


AGE OF THE MANASARA HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


It has been shown that with regard to the techincal names and other 
details of the twenty types under which temple-buildings are described, 
the Matsya-Purana (Chapter CCLXIX, wv. 28-53), the Bhavishya-Purdna 
(Chapter CXXX, vv. 27-35), and the Brihat-samhita (Chapter LVI, 
vv. 20-28) are identical.1 The Bhavishya-Purdna (Chapter CXXX, wy. 
15-26, 36 and 37, 27-35) can be read, letter for letter, in the Brihat- 
samhita (LVI, 8-19, 30, 20-28). When verses 22, 36 and 37 of the 
former are compared with the identical verses 15, 29 and 30 of the 
latter, it seems as if Varahamihira were the debtor.? It should be 
noted that the linguistic defects of the Bhavishya-Purdna are removed 
in the Brihat-samhita. 

Similar illustrations can be drawn from the Matsya-Purdna and the 
Brihat-samhité also. For instance,? of the former, verses 2 (Chapter 
CCLV), 19 and 20 (chapter CCLXX) can be compared with the latter 
in respect of LITI, 28, and LVI, 12, 13. Varahamihira’s is apparently 
the improved version in the revised edition. On this ground one 
is tempted to place these Puranas before the Brthat-samhita. But 


1 See pp. 190-195. 

2xorereaiten: Ara: caferHae: 

Marea wat sear earcafafisar i) (22). 
weaiaat ta afad fae (36). 

Wig: Saracaeara Ha fearrhaa: 
MaMa Toft TTA I (37). 

and ae wereafaet: staat: caferaia: | 
faga: wares: saa UW (15). 

Wa serra aa Bld farrHior 1 (29). 

wg: aaa Aaa farsa: | 
MTTTSATAMT BAT Testet Faas i (30). 
SSRI AST TIA! (255, 2). 
and Haag eral ser scerferfeasa et fe: | LILI, 28. 
fararerat water fraser: TART: | 

waged fredtot art FTTATT 11 (270, 19). 

and = faeareraf warent fireatisrar: waar: | 
Tate fat at fayorafesrr LVI, 12. 
again war faqofaedtipaetagarax: | 
frrerantet aged eat: STATI (270, 20), 
and Segrrerrafaedat Mar wegerac: | 
frerenentrt aged wea: HTT —LVI. 13. 


244 


INDIA AND ABROAD ANCIENT PROFESSORS 


OF ARCHITECTURE 
Varahamihira himself has not admitted his debt to these authorities. 
In these circumstances priority might be claimed for him. 

There is one other point which deserves special notice. In the 
Matsya-Purdna eighteen professors! of the science of architecture are 
mentioned, namely, Bhrigu, Atri, Vasishtha, Visvakarman, Maya, 
Narada, Nagnajit, Visalaksha, Purandara, Brahman, Kumara, 
Nandiga (Siva), Saunaka, Garga, Vasudeva, Aniruddha, Sukra, and 
Vrihaspati. Of these eighteen professors, Garga, Maya, Visva- 
karman, Vasishtha and Nagnajit have also been mentioned in the 
Brihat-samhitad. Varahamihira, the author of the Brihat-samhita, has 
included Bhaskara and Manu, who are not met with in the Matsya- 
Purdna. The identity of these mythical sages is a vexatious matter 
in Sanskrit literature. One Bhaskara or Bhaskaracharya was the 
author of the Lildvati and the Siddhdnta-Siromanit. Of Manu we shall 
presently speak more. But the Matsya-Purdna does not include these 
names in its lists, nor does it mention Varahamihira. 

In the Maénasdra there is a list of thirty-two authorities, 
namely, Visvakarman, VisveSa, Visva-sara, Prabodhaka, Vrita, Maya, 
Tvashtar, Manu, Nala, Mana-vid, Mana-kalpa, Mana-sara, Mana- 
bodha, Prashtar, Visva-bodha, Naya, Adisara, Visala, Visva-kasyapa, 
Vastu-bodha, Mahatantra, Vastu-vidyapati, Parasariyaka, Kala-yupa, 


1 Matsya-Purana, Chap. CCLV, 2-4. 
Compare : 
afa stadt areqanet Ga wate efhact 
THTMAS: ATA TEA: UI 
TERT ATTHA ATTA, AGATA | 
a wa faeanat oat fecrareracgt: UI 
* Se ae Benares, 1888, XIII, 25 to 27). 
sari Faerie aererarfet F AAT 
aqaearht Terhrsis Tatra AeAAT | 
eas aerate Tet ASTATATSTT I 
dad Tgat Ta TERS THAMHAT | 
aaa a dred Ufteet FeaH TAT I 
aeatad Wert Tear ATS ATTATT TA | 
ears aries a TET ATTAMTATT | 
AAG AAATAATT ATS TATATHA | 
; waded sa | 

Staats git ae yee, Chap. XXXIX, v. 1-5). 


245 


AGE OF THE MANASARA HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


Chaitya, Chitraka, Avarya, Sadhakasara-samhita, Bhanu, Indra, 
Lokajfia, and Saura. In the opening verse it is stated that the science 
of architecture has come down to the sage Manasara from Siva, 
Brahma, and Vishnu, through Indra, Brihaspati, Narada, and all 
other sages. In a mythical genealogy of the artists it is further stated 
that from the four faces of Brahma originated the four heavenly 
architects, namely, Visvakarman, Maya, Tvashtar, and Manu. 
Their four sons, called respectively, Sthapati or the chief architect, 
Siitra-grahin or the designer, Vardhaki or the painter, and Tak- 
shaka or the carpenter, represent the guild of the modern architects, 

It should be noted that Visvakarman, Maya, Manu, and Tvashtar? 
are mentioned twice, once to represent the heavenly architects, and 
again as modern architects. In the same sense Indra is also men- 
tioned twice. 

Visvakarman and Maya, to whom many extant architectural 
treatises are ascribed, are common in the Ménasdra, the Matsya- 
Purana, and the Brihat-samhita. The Manasara and the Matsya-Purana 
have, therefore, in common five authorities, namely, Brihaspati, Indra 
(under the name Purandara in the Purdpa), Visalaksha (alias Visala 
in the Manasdra), Visyvakarman, and Maya. The Manasdra and the 
Brihat-samhita have in common Visvakarman, Maya, and Manu. 

Visvakarman, etymologically implying the Creator of the universe, 
is more or less a professional name for an architect. Manu is less so. 
This is a generic name. Mention is made of fourteen Manus,® 
namely, Svayathbhuva, Svarochisha, Auttami, Tamasa, Raivata, 
Chakshusha, Vaivasvata, Savarni, Daksha-savarni, Brahma-savarni, 
Dharma-savarni, Rudra-savarni, Rauchya-daiva-savarni, and Indra- 
savarni. Manu is a sort of second Creator, the Indian Adam, repre- 
sentative of man and father of human race. It seems clear, how- 
ever, that there must have been an architect Manu also in the 
ordinary sense of the term, because with him several architectural 
works are associated. He is stated in the Ramdyana* to have built 
the ancient city of Ayodhya, the capital of king Rama. 


1 Chapters LXVIII, I, II, see PP. 155, note 3 ; 97, 98. 


2 Tvashtar is mentioned in Padmagupta’s Navasahasanka-charita, as the sculptor 
of a crystal Sivaliiga (phallus). 


3 Manusamhitd, 1, 63. 
4 satear arr are Taratesta Petar | 
AAT ATTA TT AT TA Fara *444 \|—(Ramayana, Adikanda, verse 6). 
246 


INDIA AND ABROAD TYPES OF BUILDINGS AND COLUMNS 


Maya is a more historical person. Several existing architectural 
treatises are ascribed to him.! He may not be as old as the Zend- 
Avesta. Ahura-Mazda and Maya-Asura are perhaps not one and 
the same person. But he is mentioned in unmistakable terms as the 
architect of a wonderful council hall, of which it is stated there could 
not be any parallel in the world of the mortals, and whereon all 
heavenly ideas were depicted in bricks and stones. He declares 
himself as a great poet of architecture (mahdkavi), a Ruskin, among 
the rivals of gods, and he is their ViSvakarman, who was the heavenly 
architect among the gods.? The town of Ratnavati is stated to have 
been built by Maya, the prince of demons, in Padmagupta’s WVava- 
sGhasanka-charita. 

Like Manu, Maya is also a generic name. He is also known by 
some other personal names. So the Maya of the Manasara, of the 
Matsya-Purana, and of the Brihat-samhita may not be one and the same 
person. It is just possible that there might have been a Maya who 
borrowed from, or based his treatises in any case, upon the Manasara.* 
In fact it is perfectly clear from the list of authorities quoted from the 
Manaséra that there must have been at least one more Manasara, 
from whom or from which our Manasara has borrowed. It has also 


1 See the writer’s Encyclopaedia, Appendix I, where a note on the latest discoveries 
of the Maya civilization in America is also given. 


2 ad fe facawat 4 arrarat Ferata | 

aisé 4 acne faired freerta asa: tI (5) 
aay fafarer Arar Stara: TTT: 

aremara & wor: war & faerarfafer 1 (9) 

afte ot acartishe fra faretaat az | 

qyasen aaa argaitfite ATA Ul (10) 

ai gat aaHa het AUTAT: TeaTferfeoT: | 
ALAA THE TT FE a4 Tara (11) 

aq feorrafrrrart Tear fe SATA | 


MITAMTTTTAT TAT at ged AT (12 
Suh ee nen ie Chap. I, 5, 9-12). 
The famous commentator Nilakantha adds the following note : 
fad ateht ered wer a faeanat verals: frerafica: | TET ATTA, 
FTTSAT saruatarrat afarary eat oeatrt q FHT PAA AT EATTTT 
Sara aaATAT ATA OUTSALAT wag: TAT AERA qaereatla a AGM FCSN 
reat: | 
mse pp. 159-161. 4 See p. 16. 


247 


AGE OF THE MANASARA HINDU ARCHITECTURE In 


been pointed out? that the term “ Manasara ”’ has been used to imply 
both a person and a treatise. The uncertain identities and the 
confusing chronology are indeed stumbling blocks in the field of 
Sanskrit researches. 

In all items of comparison between the Mdnasdra and the cognate 
works, we have seen? that the Mdnasdra contains fuller lists. In the 
present instance also there are more than thirty-two authorities 
mentioned in the Manasdra, while the Matsya-Purdna is content with a 
list of eighteen, and the Brihat-samhita has specified only seven. But 
none of these three treatises has admitted the authority of either 
of the other two. From this it would appear as if they were quite 
ignorant of the existence of one another, being separated by an 
insuperable gap in time or space. Such a relationship is untenable, 
I should say improbable, between the Matsya-Purana, the Bhavishya- 
Purdna, and the Brihat-samhitad in any case, unless, however, we choose 
to suppose that there might have been an unknown authority or 
some floating tradition by which these treatises have been influ- 
enced in the same way, even to the extent of chapter and verse, but 
without any knowledge of one another. I have failed to satisfy 
myself with such a hypothesis. For we have seen identical passages 
in these works.* All these three contain the same list of twenty 
types of buildings, bearing the same technical names and identical 
in other details.4 Buildings are described under certain types in all 
the architectural works. Their technical names have no signification. 
Unless one list is copied from the other these names need not be 
identical. In fact such is the case with regard to the fuller list in 
the Mdnasara. Therein we have seen ninety-eight types of buildings 
described under more architectural divisions and with fuller 
achitectural details than in these non-architectural works.® Except 
in one or two solitary instances like Kaildfa, the names of 
these types of buildings are not identical. There are certain 
similarities. For instance, the merukdnta of the Madnasdra is read 
simply as meru in the Puranas and the Brihat-samhita. This is 
certainly an improved reading, first, because meru as the name of 
a mountain or as a geographical term is well known in Sanskrit 


1 See Preface, First edition (Indian Architecture, Pp. 3). 

2 See pp. 187-208. 8 See pp. 245-247. 

4 See pp. 191-195. 5 See pp. 187-189. 
248 


INDIA AND ABROAD MATSYA-, GARUDA-, AGNI-PURANAS ; 
ARTHASASTRA, KAMANDAKIYA, SUKRANITI 


literature,t and secondly, kdnta, in the expression merukdnta, is 
meaningless. Similarly, the reading vyitta of the Puranas and the 
Brihat-samhita is an improved version, a good amended form of vivrita 
of the Manasdra. Almost similar is the case with regard to another 
architecturally very important object, namely, the column or order, 
for the columns are stated by the authorities to be the regulator of 
the whole composition. In this case also the Manasara contains a 
fuller list. It has two sets of five technical names for the orders, 
while the Matsya-Purana and the Brthat-samhita contain only one 
set of the five orders. The names of these orders in the Manasdara 
are different from those in the Purana and the Samhita, but Vara- 
hamihira has given the very same five names to the orders as the 
Matsya-Purdna, and they have also the very same eight names for the 
mouldings or the component parts of a column. The Manasara, 
as in all other cases, has a fuller list of mouldings also. It contains 
more than forty-seven mouldings for the pedestal, base, shaft, and 
entablature, the shaft being given five special mouldings. And as 
in the case of the types of buildings, there are some names of mould- 
ings, for instance, ghata and hdéra, common in the Madnasara, the 
Matsya-Purdna, and the Brihat-samhita. 
So in three important architectural matters, namely, the preceding 
authorities, the types of buildings, and the orders and their compo- 
nent parts, the Manasara has fuller lists than those in the Matsya- 
Purana and the Brihat-samhita, which are exactly identical in these 
matters. In these circumstances one is ordinarily likely to think 
that a later work only can make a thing more complete. But there 
is another essential point to consider, namely, that the Mdnasdra is 
avowedly an architectural treatise, while the Matsya- Purana and the 
Brihat-samhita are not. Their treatment of architectural matters is 
but casual, and in fact they have entirely left out purely architectural 
description. It is clear beyond doubt that the Purana and the Sarhhita 
must have consulted an architectural treatise for their information 
and guidance in achitectural matters, Just as they have, certainly, 
based their references, for instance, on medicine, to a standard medical 
treatise. If the Manasara had an opportunity of consulting Varaha- 
mihira or the Matsya-Purana, the reading like v2vyvta for vritta, or 


1 for instance, Naishadhacharita, 16, Bharirrhari, Vairdgya-Sataka, 150, etc. 
Compare the terms like Sumeru, Uttaramert, etc. 
2 See pp. 201-200- 


249 


AGE OF THE MANASARA HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


merukania for meru, could not have remained unamended in it. 
Besides, if the Manasara had been composed after the works like the 
Matsya-Purdna and the Brihat-samhita, why should it not have added 
these two to its long list of authorities? It would be no argument 
to say that the author of the Mdanasdra may not have consulted 
these authorities or may have been quite ignorant of their existence. 
For, though not primarily works on architecture, the Matsya-Puréna 
and the Bythat-samhita have been well known to subsequent literature, 
and we shall presently show that the author of the Manasara had an 
extensive knowledge of things from a wide study and observation. 
In these circumstances, though ready to re-adjust my views in the 
light of new facts, my present impression is that there must have been a 
direct influence between the Matsya-Purdna, the Brihat-samhita, and the 
Bhavishya-Purdna ; while the connexion between these treatises and the 
Manasara may have been indirect. The age of the Manasara, however, 
is indicated by other things also, and these will be discussed presently. 
There are only a few treatises wherein the term “ Manasiara ”’ is men- 
tioned. The Agni-Purdna, as already pointed out,! has some passages 
of uncertain meanings wherein the term occurs. For instance, it 
is stated that above the fuka-ndsa (lit. parrot’s nose) or gargoyles, 
that is, the water-spout in a building, there should be a vedi or plat- 
form furnished with a neck. And this should be as prescribed in the 
Manasara (manasaraka), or the object of it is to make a passage for 
refuse (malasaraka).2 This latter interpretation seems untenable, 
for the adjective is used in the neuter singular and ordinarily would 
not qualify a feminine singular noun. If the first rendering be 
acceptable, the expression would form a separate clause, i mdnasdara- 
kam, meaning this is in accordance with the rules of the Manasara. 
There are reasons to think that a relation of direct influence exists 
between the Agni-Purdna and the Garuda-Purana.? And, through the 
latter, the former may be connected with the Matsya-Purdna, the Bha- 
vishya-Purdna, and the Brihat-samhita.4 
The Sukra-niti is another important work, which, though not 
an architectural treatise, deals largely with subjects relating to 


1 See Preface, First edition. Compare also p. 245, note 1. 


aged g waddt waver ATHENA ? (AMETRHY or APATTHT) 1 

—(Agni-Purana, XLII, 17). 
3 See pp. 189-191. (Agni-Purana 17) 
“See pp. 191-195, and the writer’s Encyclopaedia, under Prasdda. 


250 


INDIA AND ABROAD DASAKUMARA-CHARITA, EPIGRAPHICAL 


RECORDS AND SILPA-SAMGRAHA 
architecture and sculpture.! It is a work on royal polity ascribed to 
an author, Sukracharya, whose age has not been clearly established. 
It appears to be anterior to the Matsya-Purdna for the reason that 
the latter has included Sukra as one of its eighteen authorities.” 
The question of the identity of Sukracharya with this Sukra must 
necessarily come in. But there is hardly a satisfactory answer to 
give. 

In the Sukra-niti we notice, also, a large number of passages 
common to it with another work called the Kamandakiya-niti. This 
has been assigned by Dr. R. L. Mitra to the fourth century of the 
Christian era on the ground of its dedication to Chandra Gupta, 
existence of Hindu temples, and the absence of any trace of Buddhism 
in the fifth century A.D. when the Chinese traveller Fa-hien visited 
Java, where, in the island of Bali, the work was discovered.® 

This Kamandakiya-niti, which has apparently borrowed from the 
Artha-sastra of Vishnu Gupta,* seems, in its turn, to have been freely 
drawn upon by the Agni-Purdna.’ This Purina, we have shown, 
may have borrowed from the Manasara also.® 

This introduction of the Sukra-niti, the Kamandakiya-niti, and the 
Artha-Sastra, together with the Matsya-Purana, the Agni-Purdna, and the 
Manasdra, may appear as an episode. But a time may come when 
the inter-relation of all these treatises will be more satisfactorily 
established. 

The next external references to the name of Manasara are met 


1 Chapter IV, Section 4 (1) aqnfaafefratrertea, (2) sferarfratreraeat 
etc. (see details in Appendix I, in the writer’s Encyclopaedia). 
2 Page 164. 
See ICCC CHRICC ORIG! farsofa | 
MAI FART TATA Rfetty —(Kamandakiya-niti, 1-5). 
Here, it is argued, Chandra Gupta refers to the first or second Chandra Gupta 
of the Tmperial Gupta dynasty, who are assigned respectively to A. D. 320-326 
and A.D. 375-413- : 
a itferenearyt pe GS 
qazer anced frat Tae Ut 
is —(Kamandakiya, L. 6). Eau 
Dr. Jacob places the Artha-astra in the fourth century B. 0. erlin Academy 
See 1gi1, pages 954-973; 1912, Pp- 832-849), Hewes Keith tends 
to bring it down to the second or first century B. 0. (jf. R.A. S., 1915)- 
5 Dr. R. L. Mitra, Kamandakiya, Bibl. Ind., p- 4. 
6 See pp. 110-118. 
251 


AGE OF THE MANASARA HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


with in a famous prose romance, the Dasa-Kumdara-Charita,1 by a 
very eminent author, Dandin, who ‘ probably dates from the sixth 
century A. D.’ Therein Manasiara is repeatedly mentioned in unmistak- 
able terms as the king of Malava (modern Malwa), with whom was 
engaged in war king Rajaharnsa of Magadha or P&taliputra, the 
modern Patna. The latter was the father of Rajavahana, the chief 
of the ten princes or Dasa-Kumara, after whom the work is named. 

Here is a possibility of the Mdanasdra being connected with the king 
of Malwa bearing the name Manasara. There are several works in 
the Sanskrit literature which seem to have been named after their 
patron, for instance, the Skanda-Purdna is supposed by some scholars 
to have been associated with the name of Skanda-Gupta of the Impe- 
rial Gupta dynasty. The Harsha-charita has undoubtedly been named 
after king Harsha. But nothing more is known about king Manasara 
of Malwa, nor is anything stated, directly or indirectly, about him in 
the Manasara itself. On the other hand, the internal references to the 
expression Manasdra, which have been already introduced elsewhere,? 
prove that the term has been used in three different senses, namely, a 
treatise, an architect, and a class of sages or professors of architecture 
bearing the surname, like Manu or Maya, or the professional epithet, 
Manasara. Tn none of these senses, however, would the king of Malwa 
fitin. If he were a real personage and had any connexion with this 
standard treatise on architecture, and preferred to remain incognito, 
the author of the Manasdra would have added a fourth ambiguity 
referring to his anonymous patron. In the body of the Manasdra there 
are several passages, which will be presently discussed, evincing on the 
part of its author not only a clear knowledge of man and things of the 
then Magadha and Malwa, but also of all other chief cities and the 
broadest divisions of India of his time. 


1Edited by Kale, Bombay, 19173 see page 4, repetition below is felt un- 
avoidably necessary : 


(i) Page 4, para. 2, line g3—aqaqtaat aredeat TAMARAC ATTA 
SMT ATTA ft... darnhrertor Ago Teatfacey frraay 
(i) Page 8, para. 1, line 8—areaqrqy seraeitearel ATIISa TSG TATHRT 
parsers faseT | 
(iii) Pages 12-13—aIwgat afrraraa, Wied, AMA: Taedt saaqeq at ffir 
f qT 


(iv) Pages 13-14—aafagredt ara aaa... aReretrand faert- 
Mea waMaTdaRl V1 


2 See Preface, Indian Architecture, First edition. 
252 


INDIA AND ABROAD 


SURYA-SIDDHANTA, LILAVATI 
; AND SIDDHANTA-SIROMANI 

The third external reference to (the architect) Manasara is found 
in two epigraphical records of uncertain reading. In th s 
published documents the epi i oes 

ocument -pigraphist reads the expression, which is 
used in two inscriptions to imply the name of an architect, as Mana- 
sarpa and not Manasara. In the light of information presented for 
the first time in our volumes, the epigraphist may perhaps be ready 
to revise his reading of the expression when the inscriptions are 
properly edited and finally published.? 

In an architectural compilation, Silpa-samgraha, of apparently a 
very late date, we have shown already? that the Manasara is quoted 
in its true form. About the worth of considering this reference 1 am 
rather doubtful. Not that I am unwilling to bring down the Mana- 
sara, but because there are several facts which cannot fit in to a very 
late date like aA. p. 1830, when a manuscript® of the Mdanasara was 
copied. The compiler could have easily consulted the Manasara, 
even if the latter were placed side by side with Vitruvius, or before 
Maya-Asura of the Mahabharata, or Ahura-Mazda of the Kend-Avesta. 

Of the internal evidences from the Ménasdra the following points 
may be considered. 

For the orientation of buildings it was necessary for the Indian 
architects to ascertain the right cardinal points. For this purpose the 
Manaséra, in agreement with all complete works on architecture, 
including Vitruvius, makes use of a gnomon,‘ obviously because 
the mechanism of the compass was not known to the ancient architects. 
For similar purpose the astronomical treatises® also, like the Sdrya- 
siddhanta and the Lilavatt and the Siddhanta-Siromani of Bhaskara- 
charya, use the gnomon. The calculation of the shadow is the main 
object in this matter, and the gnomon is used simply to ascertain the 
shadow. The sun’s rays falling on an object like the gnomon causes 
the shadow. So at first the obstructed light, which gives rise to the 


1 Epigraphist’s Report, Madras, 1901, nos. 207, 209. See page 4, note 2; 
130, note 53 179. 


2 See page 106. ; oy 4 
3 Called * C? in the description of manuscripts attached to our edition of the Mana- 


ara. ‘B’ is dated 1677 of the Salivahana era (1823) ; ‘ D ’ isdated 1656 of the Saka 
a ( eae The eae eight copies—A, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, are not dated. 
4 or full description, see the writer’s Encyclopaedia, under Sanku. t et 

5 Sarya-siddhanta, Ul, 1-4, Lilavati, part 2, section 4, Chap. II; Siddhanta- 

Siromani, last part, Chap. VII, 36-49. Cf. Vitruvius, Book I, Chap. VI; Book 

Ix Chaps. IV, VIII. The actual process of working the gnomon for ascertaining 

the cardinal points and dialling is described in full details from all these author- 


ities in the writer’s Encyclopaedia, under anku. 


253 


AGE OF THE MANASARA HINDU ARCHITECTURE In 


shadow, must naturally be taken from the sun. But the sun’s light 
is uncertain and cannot be adjusted according to the requirements 
of scientific and advanced study. It is, therefore, not difficult to 
believe that the later astronomers easily found some artificial and 
adjustable light to replace the natural and unadjustable light from 
the sun. In the Manasara only the sun’s light is made use of, while 
in the Sérya-siddhanta and other astronomical works lamp-light was 
used in order to measure the shadow. These latter works also 
followed an improved method in ascertaining the level whereupon 
the gnomon was erected in order to calculate the movement of the 
shadow accurately. The methods followed in the Manasara are anti- 
quated. It seems, therefore, that the Sirya-siddhanta and other astrono- 
mical works must come after the Mdnasara. 

The next internal evidence presented here for consideration is that 
concerning the knowledge evinced in the Manasara of the most pros- 
perous countries throughout India. We have seen that ninety-eight 
types of buildings are described in the Mdanasara under twelve divi- 
sions, namely, of one to twelve storeys. Although sixteen-storeyed or 
even seventeen-storeyed gate-houses (gopuras) are mentioned, religious 
or residential buildings are not erected beyond twelve storeys.1 The 
technical names of buildings of one to eleven storeys are more or less 
poetical. But the buildings of twelve storeys, largest and most gorgeous 
of all edifices, bear more significant names. 

They are called Magadha, Fanaka, Madhya-kanta, Vamsaka, Virdta, 
Pajichala, Sphi(Gi)rjaka, Kerala, Dravida, and Kalinga. These are 
the names of ten countries which cover the length and breadth of 
India. At one time or another they seem to have been very 
prosperous, possessing as they did distinctive types of the largest 
and most magnificent edifices. 

Magadha? is the country of South Bihar, where the Pali language 
was spoken. Janaka, or the country of some twenty-one generations 
of Janaka kings, otherwise called Videha, with capital city Mithila, 
is North Bihar, which corresponds to the modern Tirhut and Purniya 
divisions, between the Gandaki and Kofi rivers. Madhya-kanta 


1 See pp. 52, 47-51, 111-113. 

2 Magadha is also mentioned in the Dasakumara-charita, ate ATTY gorrt} 
aA TT, which was conquered by king Manasara of Malava (see Preface, Indian 
Architecture, 1st Ed., note). But Malwais not honoured with a separate type of 
twelve-storeyed buildings, and it would appear strange and unusual if this king 
Manasiara were the patron of the Manasdra, the standard work on architecture. 


254 


INDIA AND ABROAD 


SURYA-SIDDHANTA, LILAVATi 
AND SIDDHANTA-SIROMANI 


stands for the Madhya-deSa, the middle country, or the tract situated 
between the Himalayas and the Vindhya range the east of Vinasana 
and to the west of Prayaga or Allahabad.! Some authorities make 
it the Doab. VarhSaka is the country of the Vatsa kings, of which 
Kausambi was the capital city. It apparently bordered on Madhya- 
desa. Virata® is the country in the vicinity of the modern Jaipur 
wherefrom the Pafichala country begins. The present town of Bairat 
is one hundred and fifty miles south of Delhi. Pafichala is the 
Punjab, ‘ with a little territory in the more immediate neighbour- 
hood of Hastinapura,’ extending north and west from Delhi, from 
the foot of the Himalayas to the Chambal, Ahi-chhatra being the 
capital city of North Pafichala or Rohilkhand, and Kampilya of South 
Pafichala or the Gangetic Doab.* The reading of the name of the 
country mentioned next is uncertain. It may be read as Girjaka 
for Gurjara, as mentioned in the Pafchatantra and the Rdjatarangini, 
instead of Sphirjaka,* and identified with the country of Gujarat. 
Kerala is the country of Malabar proper, on the western coast, 
extending farther down from Gujarat. Then comes Dravida® or 


1 fenafereratet aerate | 
Waa TAMSa WETS: T Hilfe: 1] —(Manu, II, 21). 

2 Tt was at the court of the king of Virata that the Pandava princes and Draupadi 
passed the thirteenth year of their exile incognito. The Virata princess Uttara 
was married to Arjuna’ss on Abhimanyu, who, at the age of sixteen only, gallantly 
challenged simultaneously seven most famous generals of the Kaurava army at the 
battle of Kurukshetra. 

According to the Mahabharata, king Virata’s capital was called Matsya, which 
Cunningham finds in the neighbourhood of Jaipur. Wilson says: ‘ Dinajpoor 
Rungpoor, and Cooch Behar.’ Apparently there was more than one country 
of this name and one would appear in Northern India. Manu (II, 19) places 
Matsya in Brahmarshi-deSa. : 

3 According to the Mahabharata (Smith’s History, p. 348), it would seem 
to have occupied the Lower Doab. Manu (II, 19) places it near Kanauj. Wilson 
will have it extending north and west from Delhi, from the foot of the Himalaya 
to the Chambal, and separated by the Ganges into Northern and Southern 
Pafichala. Cunningham considers North Pafichala to be Rohikhand, with the 
capital city Ahi-chhatra represented by the ruins near Ramnagar ; and the South 
Pafichala to be the Gangetic Doab, with the capital city Kampilya between 

aun and Farrukhabad. 

Ee This term seems to mean literally something belonging to the first union of 
lovers, characterized by joy in the beginning and some expectation of fear in the 
end. Of the ten names, it should be noted, this is the only one which, as the name 
of a country, can be doubted, if the amended reading be not acceptable. 

5 As applied to the classification of Brahmans (Pancha-Dravida, namely, Dravida 
Karnata, Gurjara, Maharashtra, and Tailanga), it has a much wider application 
embracing Gujarat, Maharashtra, and all the southern countries. 


255 


AGE OF THE MANASARA HINDU ARCHITECTURE ty 


the country, where the Tamil language is spoken, extending from 
Madras to Cape Comorin. This tract is roughly bounded by the 
Vindhya range on the north, where MadhyadeSa ends; Kerala or 
Malabar coast on the west ; and Kalinga or Coromandal coast on the 
east. Kalinga implies the twelve-storeyed buildings of Kalinga! the 
country along the Coromandal coast, north of Madras, wherefrom 
the Dravida country begins. It is clear, therefore, that India, com- 
prising these ten provinces, extends from the Himalayas on the north 
to the Cape Comorin on the south, from Bihar, including perhaps 
North Bengal, on the east, to the Punjab and Gujarat on the west. 

A number of questions may now arise. Did these ten provinces exist 
in a prosperous condition at any one time in the history of India ? 
Did they ever possess gorgeous edifices of twelve storeys admitting of 
ten different types? How could the author of the Manasdara come to 
know of them. Was the description of these buildings based on the 
details of the existing edifices, or was it meant to be an injunction to 
be followed in erecting edifices in these countries? Is there any reason 
to think that the Manasara is a technical treatise on architecture and 
not a work on polytechnics, like the Brihat-samhita, dealing casually 
with architecture and sculpture, nor an encyclopaedic work like the 
Puranas of northern India and the Agamas of southern India, which, 
too, have incorporated within them architectural and sculptural, as 
well as literary, religious, and scientific subjects ? 

That the Mdnasdra is an avowedly architectural treatise meant 
for professional students of architecture and written by an architect 
there need be no doubt. This will be clear beyond doubt even to 
a casual reader of this volume, not to speak of those who care to look 
up the writer’s Encyclopaedia and Text or Translation of the Mana- 
sara. 'To me it is, further, clear that the Manasdra was largely based 
on details gathered together from the existing buildings and partly 
on details from the existing literature on the subject. It was, of 
course, meant to be a guide book, but it never aimed at being the 
sort of poem which is read for the beauty of its language or the general 
interest of its theme. It is very likely that the author of the Manasara 
was aware of the condition of buildings existing in the then India 


1 The Calingae proximi mari of Pliny. 
TTATARAATO HTT: fT | 
Sloe: ANAM AAT TAT: 1 —(Tantras, see Apte’s Dictionary). 
seroma: afesmitgat aah 1 —(Ramayana, IV, 38). 


256 


INDIA AND ABROAD TEN TYPES OF TWELVE-STOREYED BUILD- 
INGS REPRESENTING TEN PROVINCES 


comprising the ten provinces mentioned above. There might not 
have existed simultaneously buildings of twelve storeys in all the ten 
provinces. What seems to be really meant is the distinctive types of 
magnificent buildings belonging to each of these provinces.1 For the 
Manasara is not a history of buildings of any country, it is a guide 
book, and as such it must give illustrations and generalize its findings. 
It matters not, therefore, if these countries were not equally prosperous 
at any time. It is sufficient that these countries had flourished and 
that they were well known in the history of India, and also that 
everyone of these could at some time or other claim prosperity and 
magnificence. Of these, Pdfchdla and Dravida are stated to be of 
the smallest types, next higher in size and importance are Madhya- 
desa, Kalinga, Virdta, Kerala, and Vamsaka, the largest and most 
important are Mdagadha and Fanaka. Sphirjaka is not specified 
(Manasadra, XXX, 10-36). 

The last question to answer is how the author of the Mdanasdra came 
to know of these provinces or divisions of India. If these provinces 
were autonomous and independent of each other the knowledge of 
them must have been received through literature, should a tour all 
over India for a purpose like this be thought an improbability in days 
before the establishment of the British Government. If, on the other 
hand, the internal affairs of all these provinces were settled by a 
common and central authority, who alone could decide upon a policy 
for common good, and under whom alone guide books like the Mdna- 
sara discussing general methods and principles of buildings for all 
provinces could flourish, there must have been an empire compris- 
ing all or most of these countries. The probability of the latter view 
is strengthened by the consideration of the styles of architecture, 
apart from the types of buildings discussed above. These styles are 
also designated by geographical names, which imply much broader 
divisions, namely, Northern, Southern, and Eastern. They are called 
Nagara, Dravida, and Vesara. In the case of some architectural objects 
Vesara admits of two other branches, namely, Andhra and Kalinga, 
the three together constituting Tri-kalinga or three Kalingas. 

1 About the existence of these types there need not be much doubt, because, 
for instance, Magadha, Pajichala, Dravida, and others are used to imply types 
other than of buildings. For instance, Magadha stands for a Prakrit language ? 
a tribe of people born of a Vaisya mother and Kshatriya father ; Pafichala stands 


fo: the four styles of composition ; and Dravida for a language, a class of 
Bestar, etc. The point is sufficiently elaborated later on. 


25/ q 


AGE OF THE MANASARA HINDU ARCHITECTURE In 


The Wagara style is distinguished by its quadrangular shape, the 
Dravida by its octagonal or hexagonal shape, and the Vesara by its 
round shape. 

* So far as is yet known, we cannot point tc any buildings . ; . of 
very early date, or before the sixth or seventh century, if indeed quite 
so early.? This is the statement made by authorities like Fergusson, 
Burgess, Smith, and others. This may be referred to all parts and all 
styles of India. Cunningham has gathered together fragments of what 
he calls the Gupta style, of which, however, no single example in 
its entirety can be cited. 

The Dravidian ‘temples generally consist of a square base 
ornamented externally by thin tall pilasters, and containing the 
cell in :which the image is kept. In front of this may be added a 
mantapam or hall, or even two such, but they are not characteristic 
of the style. Over the shrine rises the stkhara, of pyramidal form, but 


1 Sept are Had seat aS HAC | 

aad at Tae SAT TSeTHA || —(Manasara, XLII, 124-25). 

This is applied to cars and chariots. The rules referring to buildings proper are 
given in XVIII, 92-104 ; XXVI, 76; XXI, 72-73, etc. ; referring to sculpture 
proper, see for instance, LII, 78-100 ; LIII, 46-47 53-54, etc. 

adele Mad sfas Ta: AT | 

ant atfas aa tat a fra ATT | 

POAT Ia Adaacata FATT Il 

Hararey arses frat xtfasreray | 

wa F AGT AcaTaTs TMATasT ||—(Suprabheddgama, XXXI1, 37-39). 


These also refer to buildings.. For rules referring to sculpture, see the Kami- 
kagama, LXV, 6-7, 12-18, and the Brihat-samhita, LVIII, 4 (Kern’s edition). 

‘ An interesting record from Holal is the label cut out on the capita of a finely 
carved pillar in the AmriteSvara temple. It is called in the inscription a Sukara 
pillar. Speaking of the sculptor who made it, the record says that he, Bammaja, 
the pupil of Padoja of Soge, was a Vigvakarman, i.e., the architect of the gods 
in this Kali age, the master of the sixty-four arts and sciences, the clever builder 
of the sixty-four varieties of mansions, and the architect who had invented [?dis- 
covered] the four types [styles] of buildings, viz., Nagara, Kalinga, Dravida, and 
VeSara.’ (Progress report of the Assistant Archaeological Superintendent for 
Epigraphy, Southern Circle, 1914-15, p. go.) : 

In another inscription (Ep. Carnat., -Vol.. VII, Part I, Sorab Taluq, Ins- 
cription no. 275; Roman Text, p. 92, Translation, p. 46, note 1) these styles 
are called * Dravida, Bhinijia, and Nagara,’ of which Bhimija, which literally 
means, ‘ grown up on the spot,’ may refer ith Kaliiga ani 
Andhra as its two far chex <p ; Bape he 2 orale, ‘ 

These and many other quotations will be found in the writer’s Encyclopaedia, 
under Ndgara. 


* Imperial Gazetteer of India, Vol. Il, p. 171, para. 2. 
258 


PLATE XXXVII 


i yh bbe me 


Lp ARSE ea Pe eed ee eS 


CHANDAKESAVA TEMPLE OF BELUR, OF STAR-SHAPED PLAN 


HoysALEsVARA TEMPLE, HALEBID 


PLATE XXXVIII 


mee 


ee eee 


THREE STYLES REPRESENTING 
THREE GEOGRAPHICAL DIVISIONS 
always divided into storeys and crowned by a small dome, either circular 
or polygonal in shape. Another special feature of these temples is the 
gopurams or great gateways, placed in front of them at the entrances 
to the surrounding courts, and often on all the four sides. In general 
design they are like the vimanas or shrines, but about twice as wide as 
deep, and very frequently far more important than the temples them- 
selves. Another feature is the cornices of double curve ; in other 
Indian styles the cornices are mostly straight and sloping downwards. 
As the contemporary northern styles are characterized by the pre- 
valence of vertical lines, the Dravidian is marked by the prevalence 
of horizontal mouldings and shadows, and the towers and gopurams 
are storeyed. ‘hen the more important temples are surrounded by 
courts enclosing great corridors or prakaras, and pillared halls.’ 

‘The square rathas were evidently models of Buddhist wihdras 
and became the designs from which the temples proper or vimanas 
of Southern India were for long copied, and further, the oblong 
rathas, like Arjuna’s temple, appeared to have given the first form to 
the great gateways or gopurams.’+ Pierced stone windows are found 
at Ellora and other places. 

Regarding the Chalukyan style, which covers the Hyderabad 
territory, the Central Provinces, Berar, the Marathi-speaking and a 
part of the Kanarese-speaking districts of the Bombay presidency, 
it is stated that ‘the earliest temples within this area, however, 
are not very clearly marked off from the Dravidian and the more 
northern style—some of them have distinctly northern spires, and 
others are closely allied to the southern style.’ For instance, ‘ the 
old temples of Papanath at Pattadakal presents a curious combination 
of styles. The body of the temple is Dravidian, but the Sikhara is a 
curious approximation to the form of the early northern Hindu or 
Indo-Aryan order, while in details the temple shows a strong leaning 
to the Dravidian.’ ‘ Still in Mysore, Dharwar, and Belgaum, as well 
as in Berar and Maharatha districts, sufficient remains still exist to 
illustrate the various development of the (Chalukyan) style.” 

‘In the Chalukyan temples the corners are often made prominent 
by increments placed over them, or the whole plan is star-shaped, 


INDIA AND ABROAD 


i Imp. Gazetteer, II, pp..172, 171) as examples of temples at 
Rac ghee ee Tinnevelly, rirangam, Kanchipuram, Pattadakal 
(Virapakhsha temple), Ellora (rock cut Kailaéa temple). 
2 Burgess, ibid, p. 175. 


259 


AGE OF THE MANASARA HINDU ARCHITECTURE Iv 


the projecting angles having equal adjacent faces lying in a circle 
as in the temple of Belur in Mysore (built about A.D. 1120). There 
are other examples where ‘ the Sikhara did not preserve the southern 
storeyed form but was rather stepped, forming square pyramid with 
breaks corresponding to the angles in the wall, and with a broad 
band answering to the larger face in the middle of each exposed 
side of the shrine.’ ‘The pillars are markedly different from the 
earlier Dravidian forms, they are massive, richly carved, often cir- 
cular and highly polished. Their capitals are usually spread out, 
while middle section of the shaft is richly carved with mouldings in 
the round. They are almost always in pairs of the same design.’ 
The richly carved and richly ornamented pierced windows belong 
specially to this (Chalukyan) style as we see it at Ajanta and else- 
where, just like the pierced stone windows employed in Dravidian 
temples at Ellora and other places. ‘The buildings are erected 
without mortar, and the joints were carefully fitted. The whole was 
covered with sculpture, often of geometric and floral patterns, 
intermixed with numerous mythological figures, and, in the later 
examples, the courses of the base were carved with the succession of 
animal patterns prescribed for them in the St/pa-sastras. This is very 
fully exemplified in the great temple of Hoysalesvara at Halebid.’’ 

These peculiarities of the Dravidian and the Chalukyan styles are 
taken from existing examples. Most of these details are also found 
under the Dravida style of the Mdanasdra which, however, does not 
refer to the Chalukyan style as a separate order. 

The Northern or Indo-Aryan style of architecture covers the whole 
area once occupied by the Aryans, ‘ usually designated as Hindustan,’ 
to the north of the Tapti and Mahanadi rivers. ‘ What is known as 
the Jain style of architecture in Western India is a development or 
variety of this Indo-Aryan order, and was used by the Hindus and 
Jains alike all over Rajputana, Malwa and Gujarat. It was employed 
in its most ornate form by the Jains in their famous marble temples 
on Mount Abu, and by both the Jains and Hindus at Nagda near 
Udaipur. At Girnar also and Satrunjaya in Gujarat, as well as 
Khajuraho in Bundelkhand, are clusters of temples of this order.”” 

“Under this style are classified monuments of very various orders 
which may be separated into two or more distinct types.’ The Vesara 
of the Manasara is apparently one of these orders. 


1 Burgess, ibid, pp. 176, 177. 2 Ibid, pp. 177, 179- 
260 


INDIA AND ABROAD DRAVIDO-CHALUKYAN AND 


INDO-ARYAN STYLES 


“The shrines and mandapas are square, and only slightly modified 
by additions to the walls of parallel projections, which, in the earlier 
examples, were thin, the walls were raised on a moulded plinth 
(pitha) of some height, over which was a deep base (adhishthana), 
the two together rising, roughly, to about half the height of the 
walls, over this is the paralleled face of the wall, usually of less 
proportionate height than in the Chalukyan style, and though de- 
voted to figure sculptures in compartments, the tall thin pilasters of 
the southern style have disappeared, over this is the many-membered 
architrave, and cornice, above which rise the spire and roof. The 
spires follow the vertical lines of the wall, and present no trace of 
division into storeys, but vary in details with the age. In the earlier 
examples the summit was crowned by a large, fluted, circular block 
called amala (pure, shining) Jia, probably mistaken for amalaka 
(Phyllanthus Emblica). The finial over this is of the shape of a 
vase, known as the Kalafa or Karaka.’ ‘One of the most striking 
features of the style is the richly carved domes over their mandapas 
or porches. (Nothing can exceed the elaboration and delicacy of 
details in the sculptured vaults of the temples at Abu and Nagda.) 
These, with the diversified arrangement of variously placed and 
highly ornamented pillars supporting them, produce a most pleasing 
impression of symmetry and beauty.’ 

‘The earlier examples were apparently astylar, then—like the 
southern forms—with columns arranged in the mandapas in groups 
of four, and later, especially in Western India, the larger domes on 
twelve pillars formed the central area of the halls. These mandapas 
in early examples were roofed with long, sloping slabs, but, to provide 
for carved conical roofs inside, their outer forms represented courses 
of masonry, which were carved as in temples of Kanarak, Bhuvanesvara 
(older), Ambaranath, Baroli, Khajuraho, Abu and Chitor (mediae- 
val), Nasik, Benares, Udaipur, Satrunjaya, etc. (recent).” 

The peculiarities of the Wagara style, except in one or two rather 
unessential points, would correspond to these details of ‘ Northern 
or Indo-Aryan style.’ The amala or amalaka-Sila is not mentioned 
in the Manasdra under this appellation, but the miirdhni-ishtaka 
(brick at the top) seems to serve the same purpose as the amala- 
fila. The kalasa, or dome, sikhd, and Sikhara, are the distinguishing 


1 [bid, pp. 178, 179- 2 Tbid, pp. 180, 181. 
261 


AGE OF THE MANASARA HINDU ARCHITECTURE iy 


features of the style found also in the Mdnasara in addition to the 
square shape. 

‘The temples at Bhuvanesvara . . . differ very markedly from . 
those in the west in being almost entirely astylar—pillars having 
been introduced in later additions. They have the early form of 
Sikhara—nearly perpendicular below, but curving near the summit, 
and the crowning member has no resemblance to anything like the 
small domes on Chalukyan spires.’ 

Burgess, following the classification of Fergusson, has included 
the style found at Puri, Bhuvanesvara, and Kanarak under the 
Indo-Aryan or Northern style. But he has admitted that it ‘may 
be separated into a distinct order.’ What is called the Vesara in 
the Mdnaséra seems to be identical with this style. The main 
characteristic feature of this style is, according to the Manasara, 
its round shape, and this is clearly exhibited by temples and images 
in the Orissan countries. 

The identification of Nagara with Northern India needs, however, 
an explanation. It seems to have been never before used exclusively 
in that sense. Moreover, it is the name of an extensive division in 
Mysore, a part in Tanjore, and a number of ancient villages in the 
Deccan.* But it is found used more frequently as the names of villages, 
towns, and rivers in Bengal, Bihar, the United Provinces of Agra 
and Oudh, Rajputana, the Punjab, and Gujarat.2 Ndgara is also 
the name of a portion of the Skanda-Purdna, of a sect of northern 
Brahmans, and of a script. The Skanda-Purana, which to some scholars 
seems to have been named after Skanda-Gupta (A.D. 455-480), 
the seventh emperor of the early Gupta dynasty, contains a part 
called Ndagara-khanda. In this part of the Skanda-Purdna it is claimed 
that the Nagara Brahmans are superior to all other Brahmans. It 
is held that they came over from the north and settled down in 
Gujarat at a place known as Nagranandana-pura. From these 
Nagara Brahmans, it is said, came the use of the Wagari alphabet, 
which belongs exclusively to Northern India. Indeed, it is very 
famous as the name of a script, particularly of Northern India extend- 
ing from Bihar on the east to the Punjab and Gujarat on the west, 


1 See the writer’s Encyclopaedia, under Nagara. 


27. A.S. B., _ 1896, Vol. LXV, Part I, pp. 116-117. Basu’s collection of 
references in this Journal and many other quotations will be found under Wagara 
in the writer’s Encyclopaedia of Hindu Architecture. 


262 


INDIA AND ABROAD 


IDENTIFICATION OF NAGARA, VESARA 
AND DRAVIDA STYLES 

and from the foot of the Himalayas on the north to the Vindhya 

range on the south. This is the very tract which seems to have been 

covered by the Wdagara style about the time of the Manasiara. 

The southern and eastern tracts represented by the Dravida and the 
Vesara styles can also be associated respectively with the Tamil and 
the Telugu, including the Orissan scripts. As based on scripts and 
languages, these divisions, Wagara, Dravida, and Vesara, have existed 
apart from the architectural styles. 

The expression Vdgara is certainly not coined in the Manasara. 
Nagara is a common name for the town, and Ndgara is an adjective 
therefrom and implies something connected with a city. Madura 
of Southern India is apparently an identical name to Mathura of 
Northern India. In the same way, the Nagarakhanda of Mysore, the 
port Nagore of Tanjore, and the village Nagara of the Deccan can 
be accounted for. There are several things to prove conclusively that 
the Aryan influence and civilization were spread, from Aryavarta 
or Northern India, all over the Dakshinatya or Southern India. It 
is true that the borrowed names sometimes became more prominent 
than those of which they are but imitations. New York of America, 
for instance, is much more prominent than old York of old England. 
Similarly the name WVagara, though originated in and indicating 
Northern India, might have become more prominent in Southern 
India. ; ; 

All these divisions are indicated by terms which were already in 
use as class names. The architecture of the country is divided into 
three broad styles and ten types, corresponding to the geographical 
divisions and the political entities. And there seems to have been a 
bond of union between these entuties, however autonomous and 
independent they may have been in their mutual relation. In the 
total absence or rather non-existence of a unifying authority, the 

th of a record of generalization, a guide book for the whole 
pte ighl eptional if not improbable. In other 
country, would be highly excep hi likecth 
words, the presence of a standard work on arc itecture e the 
Manasara seems to pre-suppose an empire comprising pees: Rel 
their own styles, methcds, and principles, which are Spat ae 
illustrated under so many divisions. _ Whether or not suc ‘ ote) : 
of generalization could have been written in those secre aya“ 
India even without the patronage, active or passive, direct es in- 
direct, of an imperial authority, 3 will be a useless, at any rate an 
203 


AGE OF THE MANASARA HINDU ARCHI TECTURE 7 WN 


unnecessary, discussion for our purpose. It is sufficient for me that 
the existence of such an empire may be taken to be cond 
the growth of such a treatise as the Manasara. 

Existence of an empire at the time of compilation of the Manasarg 
seems to be indicated also by the following facts. 

In connexion with construction and disposition, according to ranks, 
of royal palaces, thrones, and crowns, royalty is divided into nine 
classes.» They are called, in descending order, Chakravartin, Maharaja 
or Adhirdja, Mahendra or Narendra, Parshnika, Pattadhara, Mandalesa, 
Patiabhaj, Praharaka, and Astragrahin. The number of storeys and halls 
in a palace, the divisions of the whole compound into different 
courts, the quarters for royal personages and officials, and other build- 
ings which are necessary adjuncts of an Indian palace, are described. 
The royal qualities, courts, army, and rate of revenue in accord- 
ance with the class to which a king belongs, are also incidentally 
mentioned. A consideration of these matters might have helped us 
in arriving at a time in the history of ancient India, if the historical 
materials and especially chronological data were available. 

What, however, concerns us most here is to ascertain the relation 
existing between these nine classes of kings. They are mentioned by 
their common names, and not by proper and personal names. 

An empire, in any case, has been expressly recognized in the 
Manasara. It is clearly declared that the empire of the Chakravartin 
or universal monarch reaches as far as the four oceans.? So it must 
include the whole of India, divided into three divisions, Northern, 
Southern, and Eastern, otherwise apparently known as Nagara, 
Dravida and Vesara. According to another classification we have 
seen, this empire seems to have comprised ten kingdoms. But here 
the empire is stated to have nine kinds of rulers. 

The Chakravartin is the suzerain of all the subordinate kings who 
send up tributes and taxes to him.? The next king, called both Maha- 
raja and Adhiraja, is the lord of seven kingdoms.4 Mahendra or Narendra 

1 Manasara, Chaps. XL, XLI, XT, see Pp. 124-126, 104-106 of this volume. 

AGATA Hel Aer gary | 
focal areet Get Hermraeg dfeaa: \—(M., XLII, 6-7). 

9 walaabaaratay zaaeter ater: | Sa (es OSELT 0) 

Ga ATT MOT: EF ET TATE TT | 


ala waar + Hasty |—(M., XLII, 75-76) 
4 M., XLII, 11-13. 


UCive to 


264. 


INDIA AND ABROAD DIVISION OF ROYALTY 


INTO NINE CLASSES 

is the master of three kingdoms and more honourable than the 
Parshyika, Patfadhara, Mandalesa, and Pattabhdj classes of kings. The 
Parshnika is responsible for the administration of one kingdom, and 
the Pattadhara governs only half a kingdom.? The rest seem to be 
chiefs rather than kings, though they possess their own army and 
courts. The Mandalesa is stated to be content with a mandala or 
province, while half a mandala or province is left to the charge of the 
Pattabhaj.® The Prahdraka is the king of several janapada or divisions, 
and the Astragrahin looks after several districts and is the ruler in a 
large city.* 

About the Adhirdja it is stated that he must belong to the solar or 
the lunar race.’ The kings of these races are Kshatriya by caste. 
Nothing is specified regarding the caste or castes of the other classes 
of kings. But the Praharaka is expressly stated to be born in a 
Brahman, Kshatriya, Vaisya, or Sidra family.* This state of things 
points to a time when the Siidras were also recognized as kings. 

There does not seem to be much doubt that the recognition of 
these divisions presupposes the existence of an empire, the extent 
and the boundaries of which are made clear by the geographical 
classification of the ten types of gorgeous buildings and the three 
styles of the architectural and sculptural objects. These various 
divisions seem to represent the different schools of one system, the 
different branches of one united civilization and culture. For such 
an empire it is not absolutely necessary to find out a political head 
who can keep together the apparently separate and exclusive entities 
under his direct military control. 

When was there such an empire existing in India embracing the 
Nagara, the Dravida, and the Vasara portions all within itself ? 
It is true, perhaps, that even in the time of Manu tracts of the country 
south of Vindhyas were known to the Aryans, and truer still that in 
the time of king Agoka, who partially conquered a portion of what 
we are now describing as Vesara and Dravida, there was a friendly 

th and the south. But the 


intercourse subsisting between the nor ae 
south was south still, and did not come to be considered as forming 


1 M., XLII, 14-15- 

2 M., XLII, 18, 21-22. 

3 M., XLII, 23-28. 

4 M., XLII, 29-35. 

5 M., XLII, 12-13. ae 

0 araoretfaadergarnaagergat: | —(M., XLT, 29): 
265 


AGE OF THE MANASARA HINDU ARCHITECTURE { NN 


along with the north part of one and the same whole. The idea of such 
an empire as would include the whole of India from the Himalayas 
to Cape Comorin, from Gujarat to Bengal, had not yet grown y ; 
It was still to come, and arrived much later when all the different 
parts came to be united under one hand. This leads us to consider 
next the course of development of such an empire, the story of which 
as a matter of fact is the story of the gradual spread of the Aryan 
influence and power from Aryavarta or Northern India southwards. 

Dr. Biihler seems inclined to think that the Aryan conquest of South 
India took place ‘a considerable time before the Vedic period came 
to an end, and it certainly was an accomplished fact long before the 
authentic history of India begins at the end of the fourth century 
B.c. + According to Rhys Davids, till about the time of Buddha, 
Kalinga and part of the Deccan below the banks of the Godavari 
were outside the area of Hindu settlement.? 

King Asoka conquered Kalinga and annexed it to his empire. The 
same monarch in his edict (XIII) refers to the Cholas, Pandyas, and 
Keralaputras as his pachantas or neighbours. It is evident from this 
edict of king Asoka that the three South Indian powers—the Cholas, 
Pandyas and Keralaputras—were, till the third century B.c., quite 
independent of Magadha. But presumably the friendly relation which 
had existed between king Asoka and those three powers opened for 
the first time the road of an exchange or amalgamation of two 
distinct civilizations, namely, the Aryan and the Dravidian. It is also 
not inconceivable that in or before the third century B.c., Andhra 
or Telugu country was in part Aryanized. 

And, lastly, it is clear from the Allahabad pillar inscription of Samud- 
ragupta that this Indian Napoleon directed his campaigns against 
eleven kings of the south, nine named kings of Aryavarta, besides 
many others not specified, the chiefs of the wild forest tribes, and the 
rulers of the frontier kingdoms and republics. He had also diplomatic 
relation with very remote foreign powers. ‘ Although it is at present 
impossible to identify every one of the countries, kings, and peoples 
enumerated in the inscription, enough is known to enable the 


1 Apastamba, S. B. E., II, Pp. xxxvi and xxxvii. 
* Sitta-Nipdta, 101 I, see also Anguttara Nikaya, 1, 213, IV, 252, 256, 260, 
Vinaya Texts, II, 146. 
The account of Rama’s advance up to Ceylon as given in the Ramayana reflects 
a travel rather than a conquest. 


266 


INDIA AND ABROAD DIVISION OF ROYALTY 


INTO NINE CLASSES 
historian to form a clear idea of the extent of the dominions and the 


range of the alliances of the most brilliant of the Gupta emperors.” 

He conquered South Kofala in the valley of the Mahanadi, subdued 
all the chiefs of the forest countries, which constitute the tributary 
states of Orissa, and the more backward parts of the Central Prov- 
inces, Pishtapura, the ancient capital of Kalinga, the hill-forts of 
Mahendragiri and Kottur in Ganjam, the kingdom of Mantaraja 
on the banks of the Kolleru lake, Vengi between the Krishna and 
the Godavari, Kafichi to the south of Madras, Palakka in the Nellore 
district, Devarashtra or the modern Mahratta country, and Eranda- 
palla or Khandesh. This would imply the whole of the Dravida 
country bounded by the Coromandal and the Malabar coasts. The 
only place left by Samudragupta for his son Chandragupta to con- 
quer and to annex to the empire was Kathiawar in Gujarat. 

‘The dominions under the direct government of Samudragupta 
thus comprised all the countries of Northern India. It extended 
from the Hooghly on the east, to the Jamuna and Chambal on the 
west, and from the foot of the Himalayas on the north to the Narmada 
on the south. Beyond these wide limits, the frontier kingdoms of 
Assam and the Gangetic delta, as well as those on the southern slope 
of the Himalayas, and the free tribes of Rajputana and Malwa, were 
attached to the empire by bonds of subordinate alliance, while almost 
all the kingdoms of the south had been overrun by the ses s 
armies and compelled to acknowledge his irresistible might. Ihe 
empire thus defined was by far the greatest that had been me in 
India since the days of Asoka. He maintained diplomatic re see 
with the Kushan kings of Gandhara and Kabul, porak ig 
sovereign of the same race, who ruled on theens of the Oxus, 
well as with Ceylon and other distant islands. : dal 

We now see that it was not until the time of the mat Soe 
dynasty that the kind of empire implied in such a work as the 

a ; i intention to say, indeed, that 
sdra came into existence. It is not our mten ; 

i thing in the shape of an empire. 
before or after this there had been nothing rg dianrisitnns expire 
It cannot certainly be gainsaid ee Se Pent eh or 
under king Agoka. It cannot be se ery eee ari 
empire flourishing in the south indepencent | aha. Chatantere: 
Andhras, so far back as about the beginning 


: h i 
The Chalukyas also built up an empire after the fall of the early 


1V. A. Smith, History of India (1908), PP: 271-7?- 
267 


AGE OF THE MANASARA HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


Guptas and remained powerful till about the middle of the eighth 
century, when the government of the country passed into the hands 
of the Rashtrakutas for more than two hundred years. Harshavar- 
dhana of Kanauj also built an empire which, however, did not include 
within itself the Dravidian countries. What appears clear to us is 
that not till the reign of Samudragupta (326-375) or until Chandra- 
gupta II (375-413) was there any one empire which comprised the 
whole land, including the Telugu- and the Tamil-speaking places. 
Tt is further clear from the Allahabad inscription of Samudragupta 
that some of his subordinated kings belonged to the Sidra caste. 

The next internal evidence to be considered is one regarding 
religion. This is illustrated in the Mdnasdra by the indifferent treat- 
ment accorded to the Buddhists and the Jains, and also by the un- 
usually dignified manner of addressing the Brahmans as the gods on 
earth (bfi-sura), and lastly by the predilection for Vaishnavism. 

Two separate chapters are, however, devoted to the description 
of the Jain and the Buddhist images.! 

The description of the Jain deities, ostensibly the main object of a 
chapter, is submerged in a lengthy discussion of the various measure- 
ments used both in architecture and sculpture. The twenty-four 
Tirthankaras or Jain apostles are referred to, but not specified. The 
whole description of the Jain images is disposed of in a few lines at 
the fag end of the chapter. The Buddhist images are also described 
in a very small chapter of eighteen lines only. The account of these 
images too is very meagre. Evidently the author had in mind solely 
the effigies of Buddha, not of other Buddhist deities. This slight 
seems to have struck the author himself. So he adds in conclusion 
that the rest should be in accordance with the directions given in 
treatises specially dealing with these images.? 

The Buddhists and the Jains have been mentioned, it is true, in 
connexion with all matters referring to people of different sects. 
But the indifferent treatment accorded to the followers of Buddhism 
and Jainism is clear beyond doubt. For instance, in connexion 
with the village scheme described in a chapter of five hundred and 
forty lines, only two lines are devoted to them. The slight is all the 
more prominent from the fact that rather unwelcome quarters are 


1 Chapters LV, LVI, see pp. 144-147 of this Volume. 
ad wraTacHataaarraaeqa: \—(M., LVI, 18, the last line). 
268 


INDIA AND ABROAD EXTENT OF GUPTA EMPIRE 


reserved for the Buddhists and the Jains, and that the temples of 
their deities are built outside villages and towns. 

Similarly in connexion with buildings of different storeys they are 
treated with indifference, and nothing is specified about them.” 

The same treatment is also apparent in connexion with the temples 
of attendant deities. The Buddhist and the Jain temples are passed 
over with the remark that they should be built according to the rules 
of their own Sdstras. It is true, however, that Buddha is recognized 
as one of the ten incarnations of Vishnu, whose family consists of the 
three groups of eight, sixteen including Buddha, and thirty-two 
deities. 

Again, in the chapter on pavilions (mandapa), which consists of five 
hundred and seventy-six lines, only one is given to the Buddhists and 
the Jains.® 

In connexion with the description of cars and chariots, it is stated 
in only one line that there should be one to seven platforms in the 
cars of the Buddhist and the Jain deities. Thrones and seats for the 
Buddhists and the Jains are left undescribed with the remark that 
they are ‘ thus stated.”® 


lald arqsa 4a amet J frareay —(IX, 387). 
Str wrafa ta ale TA TATSTT | 
aagt wardtat carrtareaaafe: \\—(IX, 405-6). 
2Ua J alacacHeat alarfafrasroag | 
Tae, TMearrsaewae | 
—(XIX, 252-3, two lines out of 263 lines). 
daar fefar arsedt waferrteacfrrrecres | 
—(XXI, 73-74, last two lines). 
qaraaT Tet was aaoyfarariests I—(XXIT, 98-99). 
3 See the summary, Chap. XXXIV, pp. 119-129. 
Compare the following : 


aaa FT alae eaesaed Vaasa | 
ala a frase ta THSeSTeaATAT TA | 
qlacares assert eatest TART: | 
Tea saa ala aakares Haft I—(CLCKXIL, 149, 157, 165-6). 
4 fasottecoaramearie aaa (fe) rater : | 
alatetrraraat Tara Tat Aas: 1 
—(XLIII, 144-5). 
Sfarpniraraterara aacaasalaay | 
areata afraria anit + aterariet afaartt afta: 
—(XLV, 211-112, last two lines). 
269 


AGE OF THE MANASARA HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


Lastly, in connexion with the general description of images, the 
Buddhists and the Jains are left unspecified with a similar remark as 
before.? 

These are all the instances where the Buddhists and the Jains are 
at all mentioned. A significant point of omission also may be con- 
sidered. Monasteries and such other architectural objects as are 
intimately associated with Buddhism and Jainism have not been 
referred to, while the minute details of Brahmanical Hindu temples 
have been rather elaborately described. From all this, two points 
seem to me to be clear. First, the Buddhists and the Jains, at the 
time of the Mdnasdra, were not in a flourishing condition, secondly, 
they were not persecuted either. It was apparently a time of tolera- 
tion for them. 

The next point to be clear about, is, which religion had the pre- 
ference ? It was Vaishnavism. The following references will, I hope, 
confirm this view. 

In support of the indifferent treatment accorded to the Buddhists 
and the Jains, the passages quoted above contain references to Saivism 
and Vaishnavism also. Vishnu and IsSvara, Vishnu and Rudra, Vishnu 
and Tryambaka, and Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra are mentioned alongside 
Buddha and Jina.” From this it must not be concluded, however, 
that Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva are treated in the same way as Buddha 
and Jina. In these passages it is directed how the latter should be 
treated, the former having been elaborately described. But in the 
treatment of Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva themselves a clear distinction 
and predilection have been shown. It is true that the opening verse 
is an invocation to Brahma, not to Vishnu or Siva, and that in the 
next verse the ultimate sources of the Si/pa-Sdastras, like many other 
Sdastras, have been ascribed to Siva, Brahma, and Vishnu.? These 
deities are described in the usual order of Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva 
in the chapter dealing with the images of the Hindu Triad.* 


laafasqanrt qa frame FI 

sagt 4 wfrarnaa art ¢ awe | —(XLXIV, g1-2) 

2 See p. 269, notes 2, 3, 4, 5- 

3 Manasara, I, 1, 2. 

TMA , BASH, WAGET, this is the order ; but in Sanskrit the order may be 
changed. Here, however, the terms form component parts of a dvanda compound 
where the order of terms has some significance. 

4 Chapter LI, see pp. 137-139. 

270 


INDIA AND ABROAD PREVAILING RELIGION 


In describing the riding-animals (vdhana) of the Triad, the same 
order has been followed, the goose, the garuda bird, and the bull 
being treated in turn. 

It is also true that the phallus of Siva and his pedestal (fitha) have 
been elaborately treated in two separate chapters.? This, however, 
does not seem to have been due to the author’s or his patron’s predi- 
lection for Saivism. For the phallus of Siva is a very famous object 
of Hindu sculpture, and it would have been given the prominence 
all the same even if the artist had belonged to an entirely different 
sect, because without this his treatise would have been incomplete. 
Similarly the extollation of the phallus worship added in conclusion 
may be explained.® 

Preference for Vaishnavism seems clear also from the following 
points : 

The whole compound of a large building is divided into five courts* 
around which the temples of attendant deities are built. Brahma, 
Vishnu, and Siva may individually possess attendant deities. There 
are, therefore, no reasons why the attendant deities of any one of the 
Triad should be specially treated, unless the author were closely in 
touch with the temples of any one group of the attendant deities 
wherefrom his ideas and illustrations originated. In this connexion 
the groups of eight, sixteen, and thirty-two deities of the Vishnu 
family alone are illustrated. The ten incarnations of Vishnu are 
also dealt with. But no mention is made of the attendant deities of 
Brahma or Siva.® This omission is significant, all the more because 
the Manasdra is avowedly a treatise on architecture. If the work 
had been compiled in a place where Saivism or Brahma worship 
was favoured, the temples of their attendant deities could not but 
have been described in this connexion. 

A similarly striking omission in connexion with the Siva temples 
is also noticed in another important matter, namely, the foundations. 
Foundations of buildings are divided into two classes—according as 
they belong to temples and to human dwellings. Of the residential 
buildings there are four classes of foundations according to the four 


1 Chapters LX, LXI, LXII, see pp. 149-151. 

2 Chapters LII, LIII, see pp. 140-142. 

® Chapter LII, see p. 141. 

* Chapters XXXI, XXXII, see pp. 116-117, 117-119. 
® Chapter XXXII, see p. 117. 


271 


AGE OF THE MANASARA HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


castes, Brahman, Kshattriya, Vaisya and Siadra.t Of temples, those 
of Vishnu and Brahma are illustrated. Siva is not mentioned at aj] 
in this connexion beyond the author’s usual method of passing on 
with the remark that the others should be similarly done. Very 
little is authoritatively known about the places in India where Brahma 
worship was ever so much favoured as Vaishnavism in Northern 
India, and Saivism in Southern India. The author’s predilection 
for Vaishnavism seems to be indicated by this point likewise. 

In the laying out of villages and towns also the Vishnu temples 
have been given preference. It is stated that the Vishnu temples 
may be built anywhere in the village under the innumerable epithets 
of Vishnu, such as Sridhara in the east, Vamana in the south, Vasu- 
deva, Adi-Vishnu or Janardana in the west, Kesava or Narayana 
in the north, Nrisithha, Gopala, Rama and others at the four 
corners. No such details are given regarding the Siva temples. It 
is simply stated that the Isa (Rudra) temples may similarly be built 
in the quarters known as Rudra-jaya, Apa-vatsya, Jayanta, Parjanya 
and such other quarters, which are by no means prominent places 
in the village.* 

1 Chapter XII, see pp. 106-108. 

2 Manasara, 1X, 255 f., and 383, for instance : 

malta agieq arreatit agiaft! (255) 
ua aaceferest froopfroo THeTAT Ut 
wan afecet J AefeftaqtiTag | 
qartey, agiaey frcopeara F TAS I 
gaa stat stadt efert sat Tar | 
qhean aged at ariafaoy qAaTeTy 
Tat Hardt Mat ATT ATT aT 
Set: TTTATCaT FOS TASHA 1 
frqeraatr at tar afseret AIT | 
ara Tat Us TaTsTSAAT TA 
fart a frase gatas arfehas | 
facta arat that Talat Tat AAT 
AAT CATAH Ales AAT THATS | 
gelefaoyeraint are HatfewATT: 
mmerhrge fro aches KIETaT | 

But in the case of Siva it is simply stated : 

RU AT aT aT Tse TasfT aT (273) 
Gates HAT F TELAT I 
272 


ae 
it 


JAIN DEEPA STAMBHA. 


PLATE XL(a) 


Page 273 


GuPTA DooR 


ne 


INDIA AND ABROAD PREVAILING RELIGION 


In the case of towns, the Vishnu temples alone have been taken 
into consideration. In the capital cities, it is distinctly stated that 
the Vishnu temples should be built at the main entrance.! 

Similar illustrations from the body of the Mdanasara can be multi- 
plied. But the point seems to be clear. Vaishnavism appears to 
have been the leading religion of the place where the Manasdra was 
compiled. The author himself may have had a personal preference 
for Saivism or even for Brahma-worship, but his patron or the influ- 
ence under which the author was working apparently had a leaning 
towards Vaishnavism in all its various phases and aspects, including 
even Buddha as one of the ten incarnations of Vishnu. Buddhism 
and Jainism, though by no means favoured religions, were allowed 
to continue. The influence seems to be one of non-interference, 
a universal toleration, with special preference for Vaishnavism. 

In which period of the history of ancient India, then, could Buddh- 
ism and Jainism have got on alongside Brahmanical Hinduism ? 
The state of things that is reflected in the generous treatment of the 
followers of different religions was possible only in the period from 
the fourth to the eighth or ninth centuries of the Christian era. For 
during the reign of Asoka in the third century 8.c., and some time 
after, Buddhism was in a very flourishing condition, while after 
the eighth or the ninth century both Jainism and Buddhism were 
declining. 

During this period kings of three distinguished dynasties reigned 
in the country. The Gupta empire in its entirety dates from the 


1 See also 383, etc. 
aaai TITat AS SATTHAT | 
are TTT Has TATE TAT 
qe a TTT AA @é qaend Tl 
gore cad ta ferfad arfett yey | 
corala wing Aa SiS HISD TA: | 
fang earrart a ST aefad WAT MI 
anratht dard MIST TATA 
TEHA TAAL ATATMATT i 
wet UATE AA AIK HaHa | 
aaray ade afe fasvaret WAT | 
craft Tart fagefraead aa | 

—(Manasara, X, 37-47): 


273 


AGE OF THE MANASARA HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


reign of Samudragupta (326-375), more accurately from the reign 
of Chandragupta II (375-413). The seventh and last emperor of 
the Gupta dynasty is Skandagupta. The imperial authority of the 
Guptas perished with Skandagupta (455-480), and the empire 
broke up, although the dynasty continued till about the middle 
of the seventh century or perhaps a little later. The Chalukyas came 
into power in the south at the beginning of the sixth century, after the 
fall of the Guptas, and remained powerful till about the middle of 
the eighth century, when the government of the Chalukya dominions 
passed into the hands of the Rashtrakutas for more than two hundred 
years. After their fall, the Chalukyas again came into power.! 
Harshavardhana (606-648) also built up an empire in Northern 
India about the time when the Chalukyas were powerful in Southern 
India. None of these empires, however, comprised the whole of India. 
Buddhism and Jainism could not have flourished alongside Brah- 
manical Hinduism under the Rashtrakutas. Some of the Rashtra- 
kuta kings may have been in favour of Jainism, but none seems to 
have favoured Buddhism. ‘ Under them,’ says Sir R. G. Bhandarkar, 
‘the worship of the Puranic gods rose to much greater importance 
than before. The days when kings and princes got temples and 
monasteries cut out of the solid rock for the use of the followers of 
Gautama Buddha had gone by, never to return.”? 

‘During the two centuries of the rule of the early Chalukya 
dynasty of Vatapi,’ says Vincent Smith,* ‘great changes in the 
religious state of the country were in progress. Buddhism, although, 
still influential, and supported by a large section of the population 
was slowly declining, and suffering gradual supersession by its rivals, 
Jainism and Brahmanical Hinduism. The sacrificial form of the 
Hindu religion received special attention and was made the subject 
of a multitude of formal treatises. The Puranic forms of Hinduism 
also grew in popularity, and everywhere elaborate temples dedicated 
to Vishnu, Siva, or other members of the Puranic pantheon, were 
erected. The orthodox Hindus borrowed from their Buddhist and 


1 The early Gupta kings, about 300-530, the later Guptas A. D. 535-720- 
The Chalukyas of Badami, a. p. 550-753. 
The Rashtrakutas of Manyakheta, A. D. 753-973. 
The Chalukyas of Kalyani, a. p. 973-1190. 

* The History of Dekkan, p. 208. 


3 'V, Smith, ibid, p. 386. See also Bhandarkar, ibid, p. 191. 
274 


INDIA AND ABROAD PREVAILING RELIGION 


Jain rivals the practice of excavating cave-temples.t Jainism was 
specially popular in the southern Maratha country.’ 

On the other hand, the history of the early Gupta dynasty has 
all the necessary features. The empire of the Guptas comprised 
all the countries and divisions indicated in the Ménasdra. Brahma- 
nical Hinduism was the leading religion, but Buddhism and Jainism 
were tolerated. King Meghavarna of Ceylon was allowed to 
despatch a mission with valuable presents to king Samudragupta for 
permission to build a monastery near the sacred Bo-tree at Gaya. 
The reign of Chandragupta II, the son and successor of Samudra- 
gupta, is noted for the visit of the Chinese pilgrim Fa-hien, who, being 
a Buddhist pilgrim, necessarily saw everything through Buddhist 
spectacles. In his account, mention is made of a number of monas- 
teries along his journey from the Indus to Mathura, in which 
neighbourhood he found twenty of these buildings. ‘It is evident 
that, with a Brahmanical supreme government, Hinduism of the 
orthodox kind must have been far more prominent than his account 
would lead the reader to suppose.”? Fa-hien was never ‘stripped 
by brigands, a misfortune which befell his successor Hiuen Tsang. 
Probably India has never been governed better. The government 
did not attempt to do too much but let the people alone, and was 
accordingly popular.’ Though ‘the sovereign was a Brahmanical 
Hindu, the tendency to the harassing kind of persecution, which 
a Buddhist or Jain government is apt to display, was kept in check, 
and liberty of conscience was assured.’ 

During the long and rather obscure reign of the next emperor, 
Kumaragupta (413-455), also Brahmanical Hinduism was the popular 
religion. This is clear from the fact that Kumara, like his grand- 
father, celebrated the horse sacrifice, a ritual repugnant equally to 
Buddhism and Jainism. Both Skandagupta (455-480) and Narasirhha- 
gupta Baladitya (485-535) ‘continued to pay their devotions to the 


i i i bly because 
k-cut pillars, and free pillars had no more use for architects, presumably 
ae had weconie out of date at the time of the Manasara. 


2 V, Smith, ibid, pp. 292; 293- 
275 


AGE OF THE MANASARA HINDU ARCHITECTURE Ivy 


Hindu gods, whiie exhibiting, like Harsha in the seventh century 
a strong personal predilection for Buddhist doctrine.’? ; 

‘ Whatever may have been the causes, the fact is abundantly 
established that the restoration of the Brahmanical religion to popular 
favour, and the associated revival of the Sanskrit language, first 
became noticeable in the second century, were fostered by the western 
Satraps during the third, and made a success by the Gupta emperors 
in the fourth century. These princes, although perfectly tolerant 
of both Buddhism and Jainism, and in two cases personally interested 
in the former, were themselves beyond question orthodox Hindus, 
guided by Brahman advisers, and skilled in Sanskrit. An early stage 
in the reaction against Buddhist condemnation of sacrifice had been 
marked by Pushyamitra’s celebration of the horse-sacrifice towards 
the close of the second century. In the fourth, Samudragupta revived 
the same ancient rite with added splendour, and, in the fifth, his 
grandson repeated the solemnity. Without going further into detail 
the matter may be summed up in the remark that coins, inscriptions, 
and monuments agree in furnishing abundant evidence of the recru- 
descence during the Gupta periqd of Brahmanical Hinduism at the 
expense of Buddhism, and of the favour shown by the ruling power 
to classical Sanskrit at the expense of the more popular literary 
dialects, which had enjoyed the patronage of the Andhra kings.’? 

It is, further, clear from coins, inscriptions, and monuments that 
Vaishnavism was the predominating religion during the Gupta period. 
And this is the state of religious affairs evinced in the Manasara, 
namely, a Brahmanical Hinduism with preference for Vaishnavism 
and tolerant of both Buddhism and Jainism. 


1 Paramartha, Buddhist of the sixth century, who wrote the life of Vasubandhu, 
states that ‘ Vikramaditya of Ajodhya, who at first was a liberal patron of the 
Sarkhya philosophy, which is considered to have a strong affinity to both Buddhist 
and Jain doctrines, was induced by the eloquence of the celebrated Vasubandhu 
of Peshawar to turn a favourable ear to the teachings of Buddhism and to patronise 
its professors with equal liberality. The Queen and Prince Baladitya, who after- 
wards, about A. D. 485, succeeded to the throne as Narasimhagupta, both became 
disciples of Vasubandhu, and Baladitya, after his accession, continued his favours 
to the Buddhist sage. The coinage and official inscriptions of the Gupta kings 
are so distinctly Brahmanical that these statements might cause surprise.’ But 
‘it is fully confirmed by Hiuen Tsang, who describes Baladitya as a zealous 
oe saa Smith, ibid, p. 292; Takakusu, 7. R. A. S., 1905, P+ 443 Watters, 

, 288. 
2 Smith, ibid, p. 287. 


276 


PLATE XL(b) 


ELEVATION RESTORED. SECTION 


NOTE :-Tho Plan and Dotails tor Colurnn etc. 
have boen taken from Cunningham's 
Report Vol XXI. 


a COLUMN, 
SIDE ELEVATION SCALE 1 INCH=1 FOOT 


GUPTA TEMPLE, 
NACHNA-KUTHARA. 


To 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 
SCALE OF SS yt Ren 


GUPTA TEMPLE Page 276 


SAW. GANESAN 
KARAIKUDL. S. I. R. 


) 


INDIA AND ABROAD DEVELOPMENTS IN LITERATURE, 


LANGUAGE AND FINE ARTS 


The appearance of treatises like the Manasara during the period of 
the early Guptas seems to be indicated by other reasons also. Follow- 
ing the spread and consolidation of the Gupta empire under Samudra- 
gupta there came a time of peace and quiet, especially during the 
reign of Chandragupta II, favourable to the cultivation of art and 
literature, and an intercourse of ideas and thoughts between the 
different parts forming members of one empire. It was in this Gupta 
period that a general literary impulse was extended to every depart- 
ment. In this classical period of Indian history an all-sided improve- 
ment in arts, literature and science came to be achieved. It’ was, 
again, during this period that the Sira style of literature began to 
give place to the classic style. It has been shown elsewhere that the 
language of the Silpa-Sastras, represented by the Manasara, seems to be 
the meeting place of the two.t Sanskrit was gradually raised to the 
position, which it long retained, as the sole literary language of 
Northern India. 

‘The literary revolution,’ says Vincent Smith, ‘ necessarily was 
accompanied by corresponding changes in the art of architecture. 
The forms of buildings specially adapted for the purposes of Buddhist 
ritual dropped out of use, and remarkable developments in the design 
of the Hindu temple were elaborated, which ultimately culminated 
in the marvellously ornate styles of the mediaeval period, extending 
from the ninth to the end of the twelfth century.” 

The external evidences, mainly based on a comparison between 
the Puranas and the Silpa-Sastras, also point to the same conclusions. 
The reasons have been elaborated for the belief that there is a relation 
of indebtedness between the Mdnasdéra on the one hand, and, on the 
other, the Matsya-Purdna, the Bhavishya-Purana, the Agni-Purana, and the 
Brihat-samhita. ‘To the same age probably (Gupta period)’ says Vincent 
Smith, ‘should be assigned the principal Puranas in their present form.’ 

Bana, the author of the Harsha-charita, who wrote about A.D. 620, 
‘carries back the proof of the antiquity of the Agni-Bhagavata-, 
Markandeya- and Vayu-Puranas four centuries further back than 
Alberuni, who in 1090 gives the list of the eighteen Purdnas as given 
in the Vishnu-Purdna, having seen three of them himself.’ 


1 See Appendix, and pp. 211-214 of the writer’s Indian Architecture (1st Ed., 1927) 
2 Smith, ibid, p. 288, also refers to the seven characteristics of the Gupta style of 


hitecture (see pp. 195-6 of this volume). 
a ne an Reports, IX, 42, 1, V, X, XI, XIV, XVI, XX and XXI. 


277 


AGE OF THE MANASARA HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


The discovery of the Bengal manuscript written in Gupta hang 
has assigned the Skanda-Purdna to the middle of the seventh century 
on palaeographical grounds.t Many other early quotations from, or 
references to, the Purdnas have been collected by Biihler, who Points 
out that the account of the future kings in the Vayu-, Vishnu-, Brah, 
manda- and Matsya-Purdnas seems to stop with the imperial Guptas 
and their contemporaries.” 

‘ This last observation,’ adds Vincent Smith, ‘ indicates that the 
date of the reduction of the four works named (including Maztsya- 
Purana, which seems to be intimately connected with the Manasara) 
cannot be very far removed from A.D. 500, the imperial Gupta dynasty 
having ended about a.p. 480. Biihler speaks of ‘ future kings,’ because 
all the historical statements of the Purdnas are given in the form of 
prophecy, in order to maintain the appearance of great antiquity 
in the books, which in their oldest forms were undoubtedly very 
ancient.’® 

The Manasara seems, therefore, to point to the Gupta period in 
view of the accumulation of external and internal evidences, both 
political, religious, and social, namely, the date of the Puranas, the 
existence of an empire comprising the whole of India, the division 
of royalty into nine classes (including the Sidras also), the popularity 
of the Brahmanical religion with predilection for the Vishnu cult and 
non-interference and toleration of Buddhism and Jainism, a general 
impulse to arts and literature, the appearance of the peculiar Sanskrit 
of the Silpa-sdstras, and characteristics of architecture and sculpture 
consisting mainly of the three styles and ten types of buildings. 


At the time of the composition of the Ménasara the memory of 
the first seven Gupta princes seems to have been fresh in the minds 
of the people. An expression gupta-virnsa has been used in the 


17. R. A.S., 1903, p. 193. 
2Tnd. Ant., XXV, p. 323. 
3 Thid, pp. 19, 20 ; compare also : 

‘ The Vayu-Purdna in its present shape seems to be referred to the fourth century 
A.D., by the well-known passage describing the extent of the Gupta dominions, 
which is applicable only to the reign of Chandra Gupta I in a. p. 320-326.” 

The Purdnas seem also to have been known to the author of the Questions of 
Milinda (Milindapaitha), who composed a part of the work where the first refer- 
ences occur, almost certainly earlier than a.p. 300. 

(S. B. Z., Vol. XXXV, pp. 6, 247.) 


278 


IND 
NDIA AND ABROAD UNFADED MEMORY OF 


lage : SEVEN GUPTA PRINCES 
Manasara’ to imply sapta-vimhsa or seven and twenty. Gupta in the 
Hie eae: seems to have been coined in the Manasara. Perhaps 

was due to the great fame and some patronage to the Manasara 
of the early Gupta princes, consisting principally of seven kings. 
For after the death of Skandagupta in a.p. 480, the seventh king of 
the dynasty, the empire broke up: the next princes, Puragupta, 
Prakasaditya, and Narasirhhagupta Baladitya being but chiefs. 

These conclusions are, however, in an apparent conflict with certain 
other matters. Cunningham has gathered together fragments of 
the Gupta buildings, wherefrom he draws the following peculiarities 
of what he calls the Gupta style. 

‘ The chief characteristic features of the Gupta temples are : 

(1) Flat roofs, without spires of any kind, as in the cave temples. 

(2) Prolongation of the head of the door-way beyond the jambs, 
as in the Egyptian temples. 

(3) Statues of the rivers, the Ganges and the Jumna, guarding 
the entrance door. 

(4) Pillars, with massive square capitals ornamented with two 
lions, back to back, with a tree between them. 

(5) Bosses on the capitals and friezes of a very peculiar form 
like the Buddhist Stupas or beehives, with projecting horns. 

(6) Continuation of the architrave of the portico as a mould- 
ing all round the building. 

(7) Deviation in plan from the cardinal points.’ 

None of these characteristics seems to be applicable in its entirety 
to the buildings described in the Manasara. Spires, or Sikhara and 
Sikha, as well as the kalaga, or domes, are the chief characteristic 
features of the buildings described in it. These seven characteristics 
would point to the antiquated period of structural architecture. And 
Cunningham himself admits the fact. 

1 qeareisenqia: erg TaaTeal AAT | 

are aa aha: eareerafreterat AAT Mt —(Manasara, LXI, 32-33). 

This refers to the following shadvarga, a set of six formulas, with which any 

particular measurement must conform before it can be accepted : 


ara .. remainder of length x 8 + 12 
oat S50 $5 breadth x 9 + 10 

oO 5 length x 8 + 27 
ata 50 5 breadth x 3+8 
aI oe 5» circumference, thickness, or height x 9 + 7 
fafa or ts » Gxg9+30 
sar ats 3 GCx4+2 : 

More details will be found in the writer’s Encyclopaedia, under Shadvarga. 
279 


AGE OF THE MANASARA HINDU ARCHITECTURE, py 


‘ The style is similar to that of the cave temples of Udayagiri, and 
of the structural temples at Eran.’ ‘The use of flat roofs would 
seem to show that these buildings must belong to the very earliest 
period of structural architecture. When the architect, whose work 
has hitherto been confined to the erection of porticoes in front of 
caves, was first called upon to build the temple itself as well as the 
porticoes, he naturally copies this only prototype, and thus produced 
in a structural form the exact facsimile of a rock-hewn cave,’1 

This seems to explain away the main objection. What is designated 
as the Gupta style points really to buildings of much earlier periods. 
By the time the Gupta dynasty was consolidated, the methods and 
principles of architecture seemed to have considerably improved, the 
architect invented the use of domes and other ornaments over the 
‘flat roofs’ copied in the earlier periods from the rock-hewn caves. 
In the Gupta period proper, as truly held by later scholars like Vincent 
Smith, ‘ remarkable developments in the design of the Hindu temples 
were elaborated which ultimately culminated in the marvellously 
ornate styles of the mediaeval period, extending from the ninth to the 
end of the twelfth century.’ So the characteristics of the real Gupta 
buildings, notably those which existed under the Guptas and are 
discussed in the Silpa-Sastras, would be different from those given by 
Cunningham. The buildings described in the Manasara would conform, 
we have seen, to the characteristics of the Indo-Aryan and Chalukya- 
Dravidian styles recorded from the existing examples by both Fer- 
gusson and Burgess. But none of these extant examples belonged to 
a period earlier than the sixth or seventh century A.D. These were, 
however, not the first of their class : buildings of this class must have 
existed long before the sixth or seventh century, because the extant 
examples themselves clearly show that they have passed through 
different stages in their development. 

The next objection may be one concerning the Gopuras, Prakaras, 
and such other objects which have been exhaustively described in 
the Manasara, These are undeniably the peculiarities of southern 
architecure. This objection may be easily disposed of. There seem 
to be sufficient reasons to hold that the account of architecture in the 
Manasara has reference to buildings of all parts of India, comprising 
the northern, southern, and eastern styles. The southern style might 

* Cunningham, Archaeological Survey Report, Vol. IX, p. 42. Some drawings 
are given in this volume as well as in I, V, X, XI, XIV, XVI, XX, etc. 

280 


INDIA AND ABROAD CONCLUSION 


be as elaborately described as the northern or eastern, even when the 
Manasara was compiled under the patronage of a northern emperor. 

The mixture of styles or the preferential treatment of one style over 
the other may similarly be accounted for. The ¢ sporadic appearance 
of temples of a style removed from their proper area may be accounted 
for in various ways; great temples were constantly being visited by 
pilgrims on their way from one shrine to another, and the repute of 
any new fane was soon spread ‘over all India, and thus, when a 
prince undertook to build a new temple, an architect (sthapati) of 
acknowledged ability might occasionally be sent for from the most 
distant province, and engaged to design the work which, of course, 
would be in his own style.’? In the very same way the author of the 
Manasara might have been sent for from Southern India to compose 
the standard work on Indian architecture. 

The last point to be considered is the mention of Manasara in the 
DaS$a-kumdara-charita as a king of Malwa. This king Manasara is the 
hero of a fiction. There are no doubt historical facts concealed in a 
fictitious work. But it is not easy to sift facts from fictions. Those who 
are, however, inclined to connect the Manasdra with this king of Malwa 
would assign the treatise to the seventh century, because the author 
of the fiction, Dandin, would be ‘ contemporary of Bharavi,’ who 
is mentioned in an inscription of A.D. 634,” and also of Harsha who 
reigned from A.D. 606 to 648. 

Historical facts, as stated above, cannot generally be extricated 
adequately from the complexities of the fiction. Moreover, although 
some vague conclusion has been inferred from the circumstantial 
evidence about the period in which Dandin, the undeniable author 
of the Daga-kumara-charita, lived, no such vague idea even is available 
about the period or periods in which the semi-historical incidents 
described in the Dasa-kumara-charita might have taken place. Besides, 
king Manasara of the Dasa-kumara-charita, it may be incidentally 
pointed out, was not the hero or even one of the chief characters 
of the fiction. He is stated, as pointed out above, to be the king 
of Malwa and a contemporary of king Rajaharhsa of Magadha, who 
was the father of Rajavahana, the chief of the ten princes (daSa- 
kumara). In the Dasa-Kumara-Charita itself king _Manasara is stated 
fo have been engaged in a war with king Rajaharhsa, that is all, 

a eri aes of Sanskrit Literature, pp. 329, 332+ 

281 


CHAPTER VIII 
HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN INDIAN BORDER LANDS 


TIBET 


Boru Satvism AND demon worship are practised along with Buddhism 
in Tibet. King Sron-btsang-gam-po (A.D. 629 to 650) married two 
Buddhist princesses, one from China and the other from Nepal, 
and thus Buddhism was introduced in Tibet. ‘He is said to have 
built the monastery of Labrang, in the centre of Lhasa (A.D. 644), 
with perhaps the largest temple, as it is the most ancient in the 
country. His Chinese queen had brought with her a famous sandal- 
wood image of Sakyamuni and another of Ananda, and for these 
was erected, about 650, the Ramoche temple, a little to the north- 
east of Labrang.’ 

Siva temples in Tibet are rare. But from the general history it can 
be assumed that they were of ordinary Hindu style with slight local 
variations. The Buddhist monuments in Tibet consist of numerous 
monasteries and the splendid tombs of the Grand Lamas. 

The earliest Tibetan monastery is stated to be ‘ that of Sam-yas, 
about 35 miles south-east from Lhasa, near the Sang-po river. It was 
established by a famous teacher, Padma Sambhava, who went from 
Bihar with other Buddhist teachers about the middle of the eighth 
century. He is said to have modelled it after the great temple monastery 
of Odantapuri, near Nalanda, and it became the metropolis of the 
Red-cap order. The monastery, with its large temple and four separate 
colleges, is enclosed by a circular wall about a mile and a half in 
circuit, and contains a notable library and the State treasury. Another 
Indian Pandit, named Atisha, came from the Vikramasila monastery 
about 1038 A.D. and restored the Lamaism of his time, establishing 
what afterwards became the Yellow-cap or Gelupga order of Lamas, 
which became the State ghurck: when its chiefs, the Dalai Lamas, 

1 power.’ 
eke ee ae aA magnificent of the Tibetan monasteries is, 
however, that of Potala, outside the city of Lhasa. Here the Dalai 
Lama resides. It is known as the Red Palace. Its centre is occupied 
by a great block, dominating the others, which contains the temples, 


Indian and Eastern Architecture, I, 293. 
283 


1 Fergusson, 


INDIAN BORDER LANDS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


audience halls, and chaityas (tombs) of the Dalai Lamas. On its roof 
are the gilded pavilions of Chinese style that render it so conspicuous 
in the landscape. ‘It was built by the first Dalai Lama between 
1642 and 1650 on the ruins of the ancient fortress of Sron-btsang- 
gam-po, on a hill in the west of Lhasa, rising about 300 feet above 
the plain.1 The most of the remaining monasteries, even of later 
days, are, however, of Indian origin and style. One of these later 
monasteries is situated at Depung, three or four miles from Lhasa, and 
€ contains fully 7,000 inmates, mostly devoted to exorcism and magic. 
It was founded in 1414, and is said to be named or modelled after 
the early Indian monastery of Dhanyakataka or Amaravati.’? It 
is of the same plan as of other monasteries : ‘ within the enclosure is 
a large temple surrounded by four chapels, and a palace of Lhasa 
Lama.’ 


SIKIM 


Sikim is stated to have borrowed its architecture mostly from 
Tibet. But the doorway in the temple of Tashiding bears resem- 
blance with the ‘ feature nearly universal in Bihar and early western 
caves.’® Another example is the temple at Pemiongchi ‘the form 
of roof of which we are familiar with in the rock examples, and also 
as illustrating the extent to which the bracket capital of India may 
be carried under the influence of wooden architecture.”* 

Thus while the Buddhist monuments of these regions are developed 
out of the northern Buddhist styles in India proper, the Brahmanical 
temples of the Saiva and Vaishnava faiths ‘will become more in- 
telligible when studied in connexion with the Dravidian and northern 
styles.’® | 


NEPAL 


There is a saying that in Nepal ‘there are more temples than 
houses, and more idols than men.’ In fact the number of the Buddhist, 
Saiva, and Vaishnava shrines in the three old capitals of Patan, 
Bhatgaon, and Kathmandu, which are within a short distance of one 
another, is estimated at 2,000. In Nepal no succession of styles can 


1 Fergusson, ibid, Plate vi,p.292. Ibid, p. 294. 
* Ibid, wood-cut no. 163, p. 295.  * Ibid, wood-cut no. 164, p. 297- 
6 Ibid, Vol. II, p. 297. 


284. 


\ 
1 
‘ 


srtst 


WUE 
VOCE PUNT 


GENERAL viEW OF Po-ra-La, LHAsA 


PLATE XLII(a) 


Page 284 


PLATE XLII(5) 


~ - Om, Tew 
LARAAAARARARARRARAAPNG ELD, TP 6 amr | PAROAARRARRARAAARARRARAADAAAA revvttrryr ry 
ASE BNE pC BO p SP J} SMA SAAR a ASS AW A A ANE A Sar, oe FE 


se Oe es al a ee 


ei 
GL I= 
Z 
al 


TTA 
ea 
= 


BES 
buss 


38 SII SIFFS 
Se Ne SES 


WINDOW IN A NEPALESE TEMPLE 


Page 285 


INDIA AND ABROAD NEPAL 


be, however, traced ; ‘no history in fact, for we hardly know when 
any of the three religions was introduced, but what we find is the 
Vaishnava, Saiva, and Buddhist religions existing side by side at 
the present day.’ . 

‘ Like that of so many other countries of India, the mythic history 
of Nepal commences even before the Kaliyuga, and among its pre- 
historic visitors are mentioned Vipasyi and the other five Buddhas 
that preceded Sakyamuni, together with Mafijusri, Bodhisattva,’ 
Svayambhi, Siva, as Pasupati, Vishnu, and other gods of the Brah- 
manical pantheon. Tradition adds that king Asoka visited the 
valley and built five chaityas, one in the centre of Patan and the 
others at four cardinal points round it. The earliest inscriptions* 
belong to the later kings of the Lichchhavi dynasty ‘ whose ancestors 
seem to have come from Vaisali and established themselves in Nepal.’ 
Some of them were Vaishnavas and others Saivas. Their inscriptions 
range from the fifth to the seventh century, when ArhSuvarman 
founded a new dynasty. 

‘The Newars had entered the country from the north and were 
undoubtedly,’ emphasizes Furgusson, ‘ of Tibetan origin,’ their 
traditional connexion with the Nayyars of Malabar being stated 
to be a myth. These Newars were snake-worshippers, and ‘ the 
Buddhist missionaries who visited them accepted their legends and 
made them part of their system.’ ‘ Hindu emigration into the valley 
must have begun early, and the kings of the long dynasty that ended 
about A.D. 600 all bear Hindu names, while their inscriptions indicate 
that they worshipped the Hindu gods. The Amsuvarman family or 
Thakuri dynasty were Vaisyas and were succeeded by other Rajput 
families. In 1097 Nanyadeva, from Tirhut, invaded and subjugated 
the country, and again in 1324 Harisirnha, of the same race, moved up 
from Simraun in the Tarai, and, overcoming the petty chiefs, assumed 
the government. His was a weak rule, the four chief towns, Bhat- 
gaon, Banepa, Patan, and Kathmandu, each having their own princes 
till 1768, when a weak sovereign having called in the assistance ofa 
neighbouring Gurkha raja, he seized the kingdom, and his successors 
still rule in Nepal.’ es 

Owing to the prevalence, as in Tibet, of Tantric rites and sorcery, 
¢ throughout in Nepal there is an exaggeration of all the most hideous 


1 Bhagwanlal Indraji, Indian sete! 4r1-428. | 
205 


INDIAN BORDER LANDS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


features of the religion.’ The images of Durga or KaAli are repulsive. 
Gods were propitiated with human sacrifices ‘ till warned in a dream 
to desist and substitute animals.”+ 

So far as the architecture of the Saiva temples in Nepal is con- 
cerned, ‘it seems to indicate that worship came into the valley from 
the north, rather than from the plains of Bengal. The architecture 
of the temples of Vishnu, on the contrary, seems evidently to be 
an offshoot of the art of the plains.’”? The shrine of Pasupati, three 
miles from Kathmandu, is a seventeenth century structure and com- 
prises many temples and chapels. The little chapels along the side 
of the river are commemorative of the place where notable widows 
were burnt as satis along with the bodies of their dead husbands. The 
Bhavani temple at Bhatgaon was built in 1703 by Bhupatindra Malla 
to enshrine a secret Tantric goddess, which to this day is not allowed 
to be seen. It is five storeys in height and stands on a pyramid of 
five steps. The temples of Mahadeva and Krishna at Patan have the 
“same characteristic form of roof, which is nearly universal in all 
buildings, civil or ecclesiastical, which have any pretension to archi- 
tectural design. The temple dedicated to Krishna will be easily 
recognized by anyone familiar with the architecture of the plains 
from its skhara or spire, with the curvilinear outline, and _ its 
clustering pavilions, not arranged quite like the ordinary types, but 
still so as to be unmistakably Bengali.’ 

The Buddhist chaityas are regarded by authorities as the oldest monu- 
ments in Nepal. They are not called temples, since they contained 
no relics, but ‘monuments intended to call forth pious thoughts.’ In 
general appearance they are ‘a hemispherical mound of earth, covered 
by a revetment of brick, surrounded by a plinth, also of brick, which 
serves as circular path. Four chapels are placed round the dome at 
the four points of the compass and joined to it, each containing the 
image of one of the four cardinal Buddhas—Amitabba on the west, 
Amogha-siddha on the north, Akshobhya on the east, and Ratnasam- 
bhava on the south (the centre being generally reserved for Vairo- 
chana). The temples of Svayambhi-natha, a Buddhist monument, 
are perhaps the most elegant of all Nepal structures. It is beautifully 

1 Account of the Kingdom of Nepal, by B. Hamilton, pp. 35, 211. 

* Fergusson, Indian and Eastern Architecture, P- 277, compare Pagupati temples 
(wood-cut no. 159), temples of Mahadeva and Krishna, Patan (photo no. 158), 


and Devi Bhavani temple, Bhatgaon (photo no, 1 57). 
8 Fergusson, ibid, p. 283. 


286 


INDIA AND ABROAD KASHMIR 


situated on a gentle eminence about half a mile from Kathmandu. 
Its history is not known. But the great Bodhnath chaitya is ascribed 
to king Manadeva of the sixth century, as also toa Tibetan Lama, 
named Khasa, of later date. ‘It is raised on three successive plat- 
forms or terraces, together about 45 feet high, on which stands the 
great dome, go feet in diameter, and rising another 45 feet, and over 
this is the pyramidal brick spire of about the same height.’1 Another 
class of Buddhist chattyas, known as the Koshthdgdra, rise ‘from a 
low, flat mound, one-tenth of its diameter in height, to a great 
height.’ The curious thing about them is, ‘among others there is a 
four-faced Liga of Siva, with a corresponding emblem with four 
Buddhas, and altogether such a confusion of the two religions as is 
scarcely conceivable.”* 


KAsHMIR 


The earliest religious beliefs of Kashmir appear to have been the 
worship of Nagas or serpent deities. The Naga divinities were accepted 
by the Buddhists and worked into the mythology of the Mahayana 
school. Until the sixth century this was probably the predominant 
religion of the country. Mihirkula, a white Hun who was a Saiva, 
acquired the sovereignty about A.D. 530, and ‘was a bitter pro- 
secutor of the Buddhists, at the same time fostering the Brahma- 
a ere Tsiang visited the country in the seventh century, 
Buddhism seems to have considerably revived. The kings of the 
Karkota and Utpala dynasties were tolerant and built Buddhist 
vikaras as well as Hindu temples. By the fourteenth century the 
Hindu rulers had become weak and effete, and a military adventurer 
from the south murdered Kota Rani, the widow of the last sovereign, 
A.D. 1339, and usurped the legal power as Sha Mir. As thus Muham- 

danism rose in power, the old temples were either destroyed or were 
al ted and fell to ruin, as in northern India. There is thus no 
Becldhist vihdra in. Kashmir and the few Hindu temples are in ruins. 
ae temples of Kashmir ‘form a complete and hemiousneeus 
group,’ as declared by Cunningham, Fergusson, and others, 


i . Ibid, p. 279, wood-cut no. 156. 
ibid, pp. 278, wood-cut no. 155 P 
1 Fergusson, ibi ect Has of Architecture, FZ. A. S. B., Vol. XVII, Part TL 
eee aa ibid, Vol. II, pp. 251-252. Cole, Illustrations of the 
pp: 241-327: Fergusson, aes 
ee Buildings in Kashmir, etc. 1009. ; 
207 


INDIAN BORDER LANDS HINDU ARCHITECTURE Iy 


‘ extending through about five centuries (A.D. 600 to 1100), singularly 
uniform in their development and very local, being unlike any 
other style known in India.’ This statement, however, does not 
mean that there is any structure in Kashmir whose origin cannot 
be traced to Hindu architecture or to the monuments of Brah- 
manical, Buddhist, or Jain faith. In fact Fergusson himself has 
admitted that ‘in Kashmir we have a Buddhist period, developing 
by the eighth century into an original quasi-classical style that lasted 
till it, in its turn, was supplanted by that of the Muslim in the 
fifteenth century.’ Further, in describing the peculiarities of the 
Kashmir style, he takes the model of a small temple and says that 
“such miniature temples are common in India and are copies of 
their larger prototypes *® Like this model instance, Kashmir temples 
are generally surmounted by roofs varying from two to four. ‘All 
these roofs are relieved by dormer windows, of a pattern very similar 
to those found in mediaeval buildings in Europe, and the same 
steep, sloping lines are used also to cover doorways and porches, 
these being virtually a section of the main roof itself. The pillars 
which support the porticoes are by far the most striking peculiarity 
of this style, their shafts being so distinctly like those of the Grecian 
Doric, and unlike anything of the class found in other parts of India. 
Generally they are from three to four diameters in height, diminish- 
ing slightly towards the capital, and adorned with sixteen flutes, 
rather shallower than those of the Grecian order. Both the bases 
and capitals are, however, far more complicated than in the Grecian 
examples, though similar features are noticeable in Rome and Paes- 
tum.’* Another peculiarity is the trefoiled arch,4 which is also 
noticed in Ajanta caves. Regarding this and other peculiarities 
Fergusson concludes by saying that, ‘asin Kashmir and everywhere 
else in India, architectural decoration is made up of small model 
of large buildings applied as decorative features wherever required, 
it is by no means improbable that the trefoiled facade may have 
been adopted in Kashmir as currently as the simple horse-shoe 
form was throughout the Buddhist buildings of India proper.” 
The most typical and finest example is the temple of Martanda® 
situated about five miles east of Islamabad, the old capital of Kashmir. 
1 Fergusson, ibid, p. 274. 2 Ibid, p. 255, wood-cut no. I4I. 


3 For example, see ibid, Vol. II, wood-cut no. 142,143. 4 Ibid, wood-cut no. 144. 
° Ibid, Vol. II, pp. 257, 258, 259. 8 Ibid, Vol. II, wood-cut no. 146, 147- 


288 


PLATE XLII 


InNnnaMnnaaeaaat : 


YG ONE, EEN, 


SECRETS EE ETS DEBT 


tine 
Las] 
ca 
el 
Fy |- 
Ll 
Lo 
= 
-~ 
on 
‘Tol 


TUETAGUTS 


PLAN—MARTANDA TEMPLE, 
SCALE 50 FT.=1 INCH. 


MARTANDA TEMPLE Page 288 


PLATE XLIV 


foro rr or rrr tt -- 


[POO SSS Bn ea rs | 


PLAN OF RUINED VIHARA AT RAWAK I 


; 1 
im 4) 
t (ANCEINT KHOTAN VOL, 11 PLXL) 
tt ms 
It i 
Mv iI 


UNDER SAND 


a 
z 
> 
° 
« 
=] 
< 
4 
= 
= 
wt 
< 
2 
5 
° 
z 
i 


PLAN OF THE RUINED VIHARA AT RAWAK Page 289 


INDIA AND ABROAD 
KANGRA 


It is called the architectural lion of Kashmir, 


: ie Tes ; 
ruined condition and 5 f 18, however, in a 


mall in size, being 60 feet long by 60 feet wide 
courtyard is more remarkable than the temple 
ensions being 220 feet by 142 feet. On each 
fac » darger and higher than the colonnade i i 
it is Placed. As stated in the R@jatarangini, it was built ee ae 
ditya-~Muktapida who ruled about A.D. 725 to 760. Other important 
temples are those of Avantipur, half way between Srinagar and 
Islamabad, all erected by Avantivarman of the Utpala dynasty 
from A.D. 855 to 883. These are richer in detail than the Martanda 
temple. The temples at Pandrethan and at Payer are other re- 
markable examples, but without much difference.1 


KAnGRA 


The two famous temples in Kangra will complete the account of 
Hindu architecture in the Himalayan valleys. One of these is known 
as the temple of Vaidyanatha, situated in the village of Kiragrama 
some 25 miles from Kangra. It is clear from the inscriptions? that 
it was built by two merchants, Manyuka and Ahuka, under Laksh- 
mana Chandra, brother-in-law of Jayachandra, king of Jalandhara 
or Trigarta, in about A.D. 1204. It is dedicated to Siva and proved 
to be a Siva temple by its porch, bull in front, and GaneSa as its 
integral sculptures. But in the niche in the back there is the base 
portion of the image of Mahavira and a Jain inscription showing 
its consecration in A.D. 1240. ‘ This base must have been transferred 
to the Siva temple after the destruction of the original Jain shrine,’ 
’ says Fergusson, “ and probably owes its preservation, and that of 
a figure placed over it, to the ignorance of the priests of Vaidya- 
natha.’? In its composition it is an ordinary Siva temple. It consists 
of a hall 20 feet square inside, with four round pillars supporting the 
and a shrine for the Linga, 8 feet square, which is separated 
from the hall by a small ante-chamber. The roof and spire appear 

been rebuilt. The whole structure measures 51 feet by 31 
ey ie the walled enclosure is 120 feet long, 60 feet wide at the 


roof, 


photo no, 152, 153- 


1 See ibid, pp. 268, 269, 4-118, II, 482, V, Appendix, p. 78. Indian Antiquary, 


2 Epigraphia Indica, 1, 9 
XX, 154. 

3"The image © 
at Kot Kangra ( 


und in the porch of a small Hindu temple 


- = fo 
f Parsvanatha was 20), Fergusson, ibid, IT, p. gor. 


Epigraphia Indica, I, 1 
289 : 


INDIAN BORDER LANDS HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


east, and 75 feet wide at the west. Rooms for the priests and some 
small temples are situated within this area. But its chief interest lies 
in the shape of its pillars, particularly the capital. These pillars are 
styled the Hindu Corinthian order by Fergusson, who, however, says 
that the cylindrical shafts bear the Grecian proportions and that 
“the bases are only slightly removed from classical design; the 
square plinth, the two toruses, the cavetto or hollow moulding 
between, are all classical (Grecian) but partially hidden by Hindu 
ornamentation of great elegance.’+ 

The other temple is known as that of Siddhanatha, situated at the 
west end of the town. It also consists of a four-pillared hall and a 
shrine, 33 feet by 20 feet, and with a Sikhara of 35 feet height. It 
faces the east and has doorways on each side of the shrines leading 
into a circumambulatory passage.”? 


CEYLON 


The Dipavamsa and the Mahdvaméa are the chronicles of Ceylon. 
According to legends the kingdom of Ceylon was founded at the date 
of Buddha’s nirvana, ‘which was placed in B.c. 543 and 236 years 
before the Council held in the eighteenth year of Agoka.’ About a 
century after the death of Buddha, in or about 370 B.c., his religion 
was introduced at Anuradhapur, the capital of Ceylon. But this 
capital city did not become sacred till 240 B.c., when it was con- 
sidered one of the principal capitals of Buddhism, which position it 
continued to hold till the ninth century a.p. Thereafter, owing to 
the destructive invasions of the Malabars, an alternative capital was 
founded at Polonnaruwa, which in course of time became the sole 
capital till the thirteenth century. This later capital reached its 
greatest prosperity in the reign of Parakrama Bahu I (1153-1186). 
After 1236, the seat of government was moved from place to place 
“till the country fell into the hands of the Portuguese and Dutch, 
and finally succumbed to our (British) power.’ 


1 This type of capital is, however, found in the Sri Yajiia cave at Nasik, in the 
courtyard of WVigvakarma at Elora, cave twenty-four in Ajanta, Hindu caves at 
Elora, at Eran of the Gupta period (about a.p. 400 to 600). Afterwards it 
became almost universal with the Jains till the advent of the Muhammadans. 
Compare Fergusson, ibid, pp. 298, 300, wood-cut no. 165, 166, 167. 

2 Cunningham, Archaeological Reports, Vol. V, Plate 44, which is stated to 
be incorrect by Fergusson, ibid, Vol. II, p. 301, footnote 2. 


3 Fergusson, History of Indian and Eastern Architecture, I, p. 228. 
290 


INDIA AND ABROAD 
CEYLON 


The ; : 

Ofall cs coun ne ge a ho cael 
Buddhist monuments extending fi neces "Ake Sar oer 
day 2 ate : § rom the time of Asoka to the present 

y € two dagabas of Anuradhpur are of the largest size known 
ee Gore of the one, the Abhayagiri, is ‘ exactly hemispherical =a 
fas a diameter of about 328 feet, being thus more than 1,000 feet 
in circumference, and with the base and spire must have muade a 
total elevation of about 260 feet.’ It is ascribed to king Vattagamini 
Abhaya, who is stated to have built, in the first century B.C., a vihara 
on the site of a Jain temple to commemorate the reconquest of his 
kingdom. Nothing is stated about the dagaba or chaitya which 
must have been there. It was extended by Gajabahu I in the second 
century A.D. ‘The stiipa stands on a stone-paved platform 590 feet 
square, raised about 9 feet above the ground level, and ascended on 
each side by a flight of steps 27 feet wide. The chapels or thrones 
for the Dhyani-Buddhas (in this stipa) are like those in Sanchi and 
Kalinga stipas.’? 

The second stipa of Anuradhapur is the tope of Jetavanarama. 
In form and dimensions it resembles the Abhayagiri. It was started 
by king Mahasena in the fourth century A.D. and finished by his 
successor Meghavarna. In addition to these, there is a great number 
of dagabas of various sorts scattered over the area once covered by 
the old city. 

The Loha-Mahapaya, or Great Brazen Monastery, has been fully 
described in the Mahdvamsa. ‘It was erected by king Datta-gamini 
in or about 100 B.c. Its plan is stated to have been received from 
heaven. It was 100 cubits or 250 feet square, and as high as it was 
broad. The height was divided into nine storeys, each containing 
100 cells for priests, besides halls and other apartments. There were 
1,600 pillars supporting the structure. They stand about 6 feet apart 
from centre to centre in a compact phalanx, 40 on each face, 
and covering a space of 250 to 260 feet each way. This monastery 
was originally of nine, and subsequently of five, storeys, each less 
in dimension than the one below it. The top one was surmounted, 
as at Mamallapuram, by a dome, but in this instance composed of 

i i . (Smither, Architectural Remains : Anu- 
ee ae emia ere sce to the Mahdavamsa, was 120 


cubits of 2 feet 34 inch each. 
2 Fergusson, ibid, Vol. I, p. 230- 


291 


INDIAN BORDER LANDS HINDU ARCHITECTURE In 


bronze—whence its name, and, ‘ gilt and ornamented as it no doubt 
was,’ declares Fergusson, ‘it must have been one of the most splendid 
buildings of the East.’ 

Besides these there are several other monuments, including vihdras, 
monasteries, halls for various purposes, rock-cut temples (like the one 
known as Isurmuniya), the sacred Bo-tree, stated to be a branch of 
the famous tree at Bodh-Gaya imported by Mahindra and Sangha- 
mitta, the son and daughter of king Asoka. 

The ruins at Pulastipura and Kalingapura (now known as Topava 
or Polonnaruva) ‘extend in a line nearly north and south for about 
a mile and a half from the palace to the Gal Vihara and comprise 
two dagabas, besides a number of smaller edifices.’ Most of these 
were erected during the reign of Parakrama Bahu I (1153-1186). 
Most interesting of these is the Gal Vihara. This is a rock-cut edifice, 
but is neither a residence nor a chaitya hall. ‘On the left, on the 
face of the rock, is a figure of Buddha, seated in the usual cross- 
legged conventional attitude, 15 feet in height, and backed by a 
throne of exceeding richness.’ Next to this is a cell with two pillars 
in front, on the back wall of which is another seated figure of Buddha. 
Beyond this is a figure of Ananda, the cousin of Buddha, standing 
in the open, 23 feet high ; still further to the right, another of Buddha, 
lying down in the attitude of his attaining nirvdna. This figure is 
46 feet long.+ 

Close to the Gal Vihara stands the Jetavana-vihara temple, built 
of brick, 170 feet long by 70 feet wide and still about 70 feet high. 
“It was divided into two halls, the inner or shrine being wider than 
the outer or eastern one, and containing an erect statue of Buddha, 
built of brick, 58 feet in height. The entrance is flanked by two 
polygonal turrets, on the bases of which were Dvarapilas or Yakshas 
in high relief, and the highly carved stone steps at the entrance were 
20 feet long. On the north side of it is the Kiri Dagaba, about 70 
feet in diameter and nearly 100 feet in height, with two smaller 
topes standing on raised platforms.’ The whole space measuring 
577 feet by 500 feet, once contained other monuments. 

The Sat Mahal Prasdda2 is a seven-storeyed temple. Its base is 
28 feet 6 inches square, each storey diminishes in size and height, 
the uppermost being ruined, the total height is still 53 feet. Statues 


1 Fergusson, ibid, p. 244-245. 2 Fig. 137. Fergusson, ibid, p. 246. 
292 


INDIA AND ABROAD CEYLON 


of stucco, in high relief, ornamented each storey. Fergusson suggests 
that the style of this tower was borrowed from Cambodia. 
There is a unique circular building known as the Wata-Da-ge.1 
It is a circular enclosure open to the sky, 58 feet 2 inches in diameter, 
and surrounded by a wall 14 feet high. Round the outer circum- 
ference of the wall is a narrow passage enclosed by a highly orna- 
mental screen about 3 feet high, adorned with a range of 32 
slender pillar shafts, 6 feet in height, with highly carved capitals. 
Below this is a richly carved stylobate, about 4 feet 6 inches high, 
standing on a circular platform 120 feet in diameter, about 20 feet 
broad and 4 feet 6 inches above the ground level. The principal 
entrance is from the north, but at other cardinal points also are 
flights of steps leading up to the enclosure. They all have highly 
carved thresholds or moonstones to start from. Their risers are each 
adorned with twelve figures of dwarfs, and their side-pieces, or jambs, 
are of exceptional richness, and each has a pair of ndga-headed 
dodrapalas at the sides of its steps.’ Inside this were found the 
remains of a small brick-da@gaba and broken figures of Buddhas, and 
the broken shafts of pillars of two circles that had surrounded the 
dagaba. it ol 
In this group there are, as stated by Fergusson, several buildings 
in the Dravidian style of architecture. One of these, ‘ miscalled the 
Dalada Maligawa,’ is really a Saiva temple, erected probably by 
Nissanka Malla, about 1190. ; 
‘There are some interesting ancient bridges, formed on upright 
over which stone lintels are placed, and on these other 


e pillars : 
stone p 3 feet in length from one lintel to another, to 


stone beams, about 5 
form the road.’ 


1 Plate, ibid, p. 246-247. 


293 


CHAPTER IX 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN SERINDIA 
OR CENTRAL ASIA 


IN ADDITION TO numerous literary references and travellers’ accounts, 
archaelogical evidences, especially architectural and sculptural 
remains, have shown beyond doubt that Indian civilization marched 
further into Central Asia. 

The area extends ‘ from the Hindukush valleys and the uppermost 
-Oxus right across the whole length of the Tarim Basin to the province 
of Kan-su on the western marches of China proper.’! This region 
covers ‘ practically the whole of that vast drainageless belt between 
the Pamirs in the west and the Pacific watershed in the east, which, 
for close on a thousand years, formed the special meeting-ground of 
Chinese civilization, introduced by trade and political penetration, 
and of Indian culture propagated by Buddhism.’ This desert region 
contains ‘relics of that ancient civilization which the joint in- 
fluences of Buddhist India, China, and Hellenized Near East had 
fostered in the scattered oases of those remote Central Asian passage 
lands.’ 

KHOTAN 


The Chinese records make it beyond doubt that Buddhism estab- 
lished in Eastern (Chinese) Turkestan, Khotan, Kasghar, oasis of 
Yarkand, and Karghalik, had been imported, directly or indirectly, 
from India. The migration of Indian culture in Central Asia was 
further corroborated by various archaeological evidences, including 
the discovery of the famous birch-bark codex by Colonel Bower from 
Kucha, the find of birch-bark leaves (containing a Buddhist text in 
early Prakrit language and in Kharoshthi script) by M. Dutreuil de 
Rhins at Khotan, and the Sanskrit texts (in Brahmi script) discovered 
in the ruined shrines and monastic dwellings of Dandan-Uiliq and 
Endere by Sir M. Aurel Stein, pointing to the study of Sanskrit 
Buddhist literature in Khotan down to the end of the eighth century 
A.D. The Central Asian explorations of Aurel Stein have supplied 
ample materials to identify in this region the Indian architectural and 


1 This region has been briefly designated by the French scholars as ‘ Serindia’, 
depending on ‘Learned popular etymology.’ Sir Aurel Stein, Introduction, 
Serindia, Vol. I. 


294, 


INDIA AND ABROAD 


KHOTAN 


sculptural objects, including numerous articles of furnitur 
predominantly of Buddhistic style, but the purely Sane ee 
of deities and temples are not altogether missing. The village schemes 
aud easels also appear to have been of Hindu origin 
in their general plan and other essential features. The differences 
may be easily accounted for by the climate, sandy desert, soil con- 
dition, and other local causes. That the territory of Khotan had 
been under Chinese supremacy for a long time during the Han and 
the Tang dynasties, and that the influence of Chinese civilization 
strongly asse1ted itself, are proved beyond doubt by the finds of 
Chinese records in wood and paper, Chinese graffiti, coins, articles 
of industrial art, etc. The finds of Tibetan MSS. and graffiti in 
the ruined fort and temple of Endere would also show the Tibetan 
influences. Despite these varied foreign influences at work, Eastern 
Turkestan, including Khotan, ‘possessed during the pre-Muham- 
madan epoch a well-defined civilization of its own.’ The religious 
predeliction and possibly the superiority of the Indian style may, 
however, have induced the migration of Hindu architecture in Central 
Indian colonies as in Indo-China and in Indonesian islands. 

The remains consist of numerous mounds, stipas, vihdras, sanc- 
tuaries, shrines, temples, palaces, pavilions, forts, and unrecognizable 
dwellings. 

‘ The top of the mound (Kurghan-Tim) stands 70 feet above the 
ground level of the neighbouring fields, but it rises in reality to fully 
85, feet above the lowest course of masonry at present traceable.’ 
‘The whole mound consisted originally of sundried bricks of large 
size, laid in regular courses with thin layers of mud plaster to act 
as binding material.’ ‘The far advanced ruin of the whole structure 
makes it impossible to ascertain its original dimensions and construc- 
tive features. There can be no doubt as to the remains being those 
of a stipa, built with a remarkably large dome, possibly of hemis- 
pherical shape... - The base was square and arranged in three 
storeys . . . its greatest length measuring about 160 feet from east 
to west, compared with about 130 feet from north to south.’? 

The Mauri-Tim Stipa bears similar features.” There are some 
common architectural similarities between these and the ruined stipas 


1 Ancient Khotan, by Sir M. Aurel Stein, Vol. I, p. 74, photo no. 13; Plate 


_ II) xxii. 
we | Oe "Mauri-Tim Stipa (pp. 81, 82; photo I, Vol. I). 


295 


CENTRAL ASIA HINDU ARCHITECTURE [y 


of Takhtaband in Buner and of Bahar near ancient Taxila,! in the 
Manikyala Stipa, and in the numerous stipas of the Kabul valley.2 
It is clear that there exists a close agreement in regard to the 
general architectural arrangement between all Turkestan stipas and 
the corresponding structures in the Kabul valley and on the Indian 
north-west frontier. The development of stipa architecture in India, 
as elucidated by M. Foucher, will further show that the Turkestan 
stipas conform closely to an Indian type. 

‘The stupas of Mauri-Tim, Topa-Tim, Niya, Endere, and Rawak 
all show the dome, which is the essential and unvarying feature of 
every stipa, raised on a square base, and this is again arranged in 
three storeys. The relative proportion between these storeys varies 
considerably in the several structures, and so also do the shape of the 
dome and the relative height of the cylindrical portion or drum which 
intervenes between the top storey of the base and the copula proper. 
But the square shape of the base and its three-fold arrangement:are 
constant features, and the former in any case is characteristic also 
of the great majority of stipas in the border lands of India and 
Afghanistan. On the other hand the round base, which belongs to 
an earlier stage of stipa construction, is represented in those terri- 
tories only by a few examples, and seems completely absent in 
Eastern Turkestan.’® 

‘The king’s new monastery,’ comprising the splendid stipa and 
temple of which Fa-hien has left a detailed description, were situated 
a little to the west of the Khotan capital. ‘ Seven or eight lea to the 
west of the city there is what is called the king’s new monastery, the 
building of which took eighty years, and extended over three reigns. 
Tt may be 250 cubits in height, rich in elegant carving and inlaid 
work, covered above with gold and silver, and finished throughout 
with a combination of all the precious substances. Behind the tope 
there has been built a Hall of Buddha, of the utmost magnificence 
and beauty, the beams, pillars, venetianed doors and windows being 
all overlaid with leaf-gold. Besides these, the apartments for the 


Stein, Report on Archaeological Tour with Buner Field Force, p. 40, Plate viii, 
Indian Antiquary, 1900, p. 145. 

* Cunningham, Archaeological Survey Report, Vol. V, Plate xxii. 

’ Foucher, L’Art de Gandhara, I, Ppp. 62-98. 

‘Stein, Ancient Khotan, p. 83, note 12. 5 [bid, p. 83. 


296 


INDIA AND ABROAD 
KHOTAN 


monks .are apOsae Ly and elegantly decorated, beyond the power 
of words to express. 4 ‘ From the great height mentioned,’ con- 
cludes Sir Aurel Stein, ‘it is clear that the structure was of wood 
like the famous Vaisravana temple in the capital itself.” Stein 
identifies this great shrine with the So-mo-je convent of Hiuen-Tsang 
and says that it ‘ must be located at the present village of Somiya, 
close to the west of Yot Kan.’? 

Hieun-Tsang has left unusually full descriptions of various places 
of Buddhist worship outside the capital of Khotan. ‘The nearest 
among these sanctuaries was the convent of So-mo-je, with a stupa 
a hundred feet high in its centre a little over a mile to the west of 
the royal city.’? Hieun-Tsang ascribes its origin to a legend which 
really means that some architects were imported from India for its 
construction. The legend relates that : ‘one time an Arhat coming 
from a distant foreign land had taken up his abode there in the 
middle of a wood. The miraculous light spread around by his 
spiritual power was noticed by the king as he stopped at night in a 
double-storeyed pavilion of his palace. Having been informed of its 
cause the king proceeded to the holy man and respectfully invited 
him into the palace. On the Sramana refusing to leave the wood, 
the king full of reverence built a convent for him and a stiipa. When 
afterwards the king had procured a quantity of sacred relics and 
regretted not to have been able to insert them under the sipa, the 
Arhat directed him to have the precious objects enclosed successively 
in receptacles of gold, silver, copper and stone. When this had been 
done and the relics had been transported by the king and his chief 
officers on an ornamented car to the convent, the Arhat raised the 
stipa on the palm of his hand and held it while the king’s workmen 
dug a place for the sacred deposit. Then, on the work being accom- 
plished, the Arhat once more lowered the stipa to its original position 


without any damage.® 


1 Fa-hien’s Travels, Translation, Legge, pp. 19 54-5 Stein, Ancient Kholan, 1 


. 194. 
Pr Soin refers to Memoirs, Il, pp- 235 844+ Si-yu-ki, II, pp- 316 sq.: Remusat, 


Kapisa, (Memoirs, 1, Pp. 45 sq.» Si-yu-ki, 
Foucher, L’ Art de Gandhara, I, p- 52; with r 
purpose of stupa construction. 
Stein, ibid, p. 223+ 
297 


CENTRAL ASIA HINDU ARGHI TECTURE IN 


The Tibetan form of the legend is slightly different. I} is stated 
in the Annals of Li-yul that king Vijayavirya, the eighth successor 
of Vijaya-sambhava, under whom Buddhism was believed to have 
been first introduced, ‘one day while looking out of Ssrog-mukhar 
(life-fort) he perceived a light brilliant as gold and silver at the 
spot where now stands the Hgum-stir Chaitya. When the king 
learned that the Buddha had foretold that at that spot a vihara 
would be built, he called to his presence the Buddhist Buddhadita, 
and having made him his spiritual adviser, ordered him to direct 
the building of the Hgum-stir Vihara.’ Stein emphatically asserts 
that it refers to the same shrine and the Buddha-dita corresponds — 
to Hiuen-Tsang’s Arhata.4 

The buildings of the ancient Khotan capital are referred to in all 
Chinese records, and comprise magnificent temples, palaces and 
pavilions of which, however, the architectural details are not avail- 
able. In a passage of the Yini, composed by Hui-lin in the eighth or 
ninth century,? reference is made to an important building. It shows 
that the famous temple of Vaigravana, which the legends related 
by Hiuen-Tsang and the Annals of Li-yul represent as the oldest 
shrine of the kingdom, stood in the city of Yu-tien, and that it was 
“a tower built in wood seven storeys high. The god was supposed 
to reside on the summit. Hiuen-Tsang particularly extols the rich- — 
ness of the temple as it existed in his time.’? 

This building is apparently of Indian origin as it bears the name 
of an Indian deity. : 

“As regards the royal palace,’ says Sir Aurel Stein,? ‘we learn 
from the account of the Chinese mission sent in 938 that it com- 
prised a number of buildings all facing to the east, and among them 
a pavilion called that of the seven pheenixes.* An earlier notice, 
found in the Liang Annals, specially mentions the frescoes adorning 
the king’s palace. That the city was enclosed by walls we know 
from Hieun-Tsang. He adds that they were of no great height. . . . 
The ancient fortifications still existing at the sites of Endere, 


1 Stein, Ancient Khotan, I, Pp. 223. 

2M. S. Levi, Notes Chinoises L’Inde, p. 39. 

3 Stein, Ancient Khotan, I, p. 202. 
; 4 Remusat, Ville de Khotan, p. 80, where the name of the palace is given as Chin- 
ise-tien. 

5 Remusat, loc. cit., p. 16. 


298 


INDIA AND ABROAD 


KHOTAN 


Karadong, Ak-sipil show that we may safely assume those walls to 
have consisted mainly of ramparts of stamped loess. At the gate 
of the city there used to take place the solemn reception by the king 
and the ladies of his court of the procession of great image cars of 
which Fa-hien has left us so vivid a description.’4 

The Indian equivalent of the pavilion of seven phcenixes (Naga 
and Wdgini?) and of the Chinese name, Chin-ise-tien, of the palace 
are not quite clear. But the eastern orientation (facade), the forti- 
fied plan of the walled city with rampart around, and the pro- 
cession of the great image cars are familiar objects of Hindu 
architecture described in great detail in the Manasdra and other 
Silpa-Sastras. 

‘In a convent known as the Ti-chia-po-fu-na Sangharama (Dirgha- 
bhavana) and situated a little over 10 lea to the south-west of the 
capital, the pilgrim (Hiuen-Tsang) was shown the statue of a stand- 
ing Buddha which was supposed to have miraculously come to this 
spot from Kucha. A Khotan minister exiled to the latter state had 
secured his repatriation by assiduous worship of this image. . . . The 
minister then built for it this convent.’ Stein identifies it with the 
Ziarat of ‘Bowa-kambar,’ which he found to consist of ‘a large 
square cemetery enclosing the high mud-built tomb’ of a saint. 
‘The level of the cemetery near its centre lies fully 12 feet below 
the surrounding fields. . - . A grove of fine old trees faces the eastern 

92 
See the most imposing structure among the extant ruins of the 
Kkotan region is the Rawak Stipa and Vihara. The greater part of 
the stipa has gone, only its high base and enclosing quadrangle remain- 
ing. ‘ The vihara court formed a great rectangle, measuring 163 feet 
inside on its south-western and north-eastern faces, and 141 feet 
on its shorter sides towards the north-west and south-east. It was 
enclosed by a wall about 3 feet 6 inches thick, solidly built of sun- 
dried bricks. At the south corner. - + this wae rose to a height 
of 11 feet, but was probably once still higher. .«. Lhe gate im 
the south-east face, 83 feet to 10 feet wide, was the only entrance 


to the court.’ 


i 2 Stein, Ancient Khotan, I, pp. 225-226. 
i Travels of Fa-hien, p- 19- : : 6 
3 aE mets it, a well as in the stipa, measured 20 by 14 inches ee 
ected of 3} to 4 inches, practically identical with the dimensions of the 


Ak-sipil bricks. 
299 


CENTRAL ASIA HINDU ARCHI TECTURE IN: 


“The centre of the quadrangle is occupied by the imposin 
stipa base which rises in three storeys to a height of 201 feet above 
the floors of the court. . . . The lowest storey, 78 feet Square and 
7z feet high, rests on a plinth of four steps showing aggregate eleva- 
tion of 3 feet. The second storey is 453 feet square, with a height 
of g feet. It is surmounted by a circular drum, 3 feet high and Tee 
ceding on the top, which serves as a plinth for another circular drum 
forming part of the stipa dome.! As the masonry of the dome is 
intact to a height of about 84 feet, the exact elevation of the dome 
and the shape of the cupola cannot be determined. But the other 
indications will show that, like other monuments, it is also of the 
Indian style. This expectation is fulfilled by the other members of 
the stipa. 

‘Considerable variation and originality was introduced into the 
ground-plan by a series of bold projections on each face of the base 
supporting well-proportioned flights. of steps. Through these pro- 
jections the ground-plan of the base has assumed the shape of a - 
symmetrically developed cross, each of the four arms of which ex- 
tends abeut 52 feet on the lowest level, as measured from the centre 
line of the stipa. The broad flights of steps which occupied the 
centre of each. of the four faces of the base, and, carried by the pro- 
jecting portions, led up without a break from the level of the court 
to the very foot of the dome must have been an imposing architectural 
feature.’+ 

This obviously points to the Svastika plan of the Manasara archi- 
tecture. 

The extraordinary architectural features and imposing dimen- 
sions of Rewak monuments are quite in keeping with the rich series 
of relief sculptures decorating the walls of the enclosing vihdra. 
“The main adornment of the walls, both towards the court and 
outside, consisted throughout of rows of relief statues in stucco over 
life-size. All the large relief represented Buddhas or Bodhisattvas ; 
but from the varying poses, accessories, etc., still recognizable, 
a number of groups could be distinguished, arranged apparently 
with some regard to symmetrical disposition. Between the colossal 
statues at the frequent intervals were smaller representations of 
attendant divinities or saints. In numerous instances the walls were 
further decorated with elaborate plaques in stucco, forming haloes 

* Stein, Ancient Khotan, pp. 483, 484, 485. 


300 


INDIA AND ABROAD KHOTAN 


above the heads of figures, or, in some cases, where sufficient space 
had been allowed, even with complete aureoles in relief around 
them. ... The whole of the relief work had been originally 
coloured, but the layers of paint had in most cases peeled off except 
where well-protected in drapery folds, etc. Thus the greatest por- 
tions of the stucco images presented themselves in the red ground 
colour of the clay in which they have been modelled.’ 

‘The total number of individual reliefs, most of them over life- 
size, amounted to ninety-one.’ In the poses of these relief Sir 
’ Aurel Stein has identified the Abhaya-pdni-mudra like in the 
Dandan-Uiliq and Kighillik reliefs, and the Vara-mudra and Bha- 
misparsa-mudra, differing only by the pose of the hand with the 
palm turned towards or inwards. There are images of colossal, 
and small Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, both standing and seated 
with wave-lined draperies and characteristic nimbus, vajras, and 
other features. There are dvdrapdlas and female busts and heads 
of Yakshas and Yakshinis.2 So far as the date of the Rawak remains 
is concerned, Sir Aurel Stein cautiously says that ‘the fact of the 
Rawak sculptures approaching their Gandhara models much nearer 
than those of Dandan-Uiliq or Endere, and the total absence among 
them of any of those images with multiple limbs, etc., which charac- 
terize the later pantheon of Northern Mahayana Buddhism, may 
at once be accepted as a proof that they are older. But beyond this 
it would scarcely be safe to draw any further chronological conclusions 
from the evidence of the -artistic remains themselves, seeing how 
scanty our data are for the chronology of the Graeco-Buddhist sculp- 
ture in Gandhara itself, and how little we know as yet of the historical 
development of its offshoot transplanted to Eastern Turkestan.’$ : 

The ruins of Endere comprise the remains of a fort together with 
the remains of a stiipa and a temple. The fort is circular in shape, 
a variety described in the Manasara Silpa-Sastra. It is surrounded 
by a 30 feet wide rampart’ varying in height from 5 to 25 feet, with 
masonry parapet of 5 feet 6 inches height and 3 feet thickness at the 
entrance to the south. Behind the parapet ran a platform. The gate, 
18 feet wide, was flanked on either side by a small square bastion 

or tower, projecting about 20 feet beyond the outer foot of the 


‘ ‘ent Khotan, p. 486. ae 
Be Eton tHe 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68; ibid, I, pp: 490-99: 
8 Stein, ibid., I, p. 500 
, gor 


CENTRAL ASIA HINDU ARCHITECTURE Ly 


circular rampart. To the west of the gate there is a guard-room,1 
Following the rules of the Silpa-Sastra, the temple is situated just in 
the centre, which is technically known a’ the Brahmapitha. nie 
cella of the temple formed a square of 18 feet 4 inches inside, 
enclosed by walls of timber and plaster having a thickness of 
10 inches. The entrance lay to the east. The enclosing passage, 
the walls of which were of similar construction . . . was 5 feet 
wide, its plastered floor lay 3 feet higher than that of the cella.’ 
‘It appears probable that, for purposes of lighting, the cella was 
provided with a raised roof in the centre.* This would look 
like some form of Hindu fikhara. ‘'‘The four corners of the cella 
were occupied by plaster images, almost wholly detached and 
standing each on a basement to represent an open lotus with the 
petals pointing downwards. By the side of the statues in the north- 
east and south-east corners there were probably figures of loka- 
falas or guardians of regions.’ ‘The centre of the cella was occu- 
pied by a massive octagonal base or platform, 93 feet long and 71 
feet broad. The base proper rose to a height of 2 feet 8 inches above 
the floor. On it four life-size relief statues in stucco must have stood, 
the lotus-shaped pedestals of three being still more or less intact.’ 
‘On the north-east facet the fresco remains showed two rows of seated . 
male figures, seven in each, apparently Buddhas or Bodhisattvas.’ 

The temple is surrounded by groups of small buildings to the north, 
east, south-west and north-west at a distance of some 50 feet. The 
purpose of all these buildings is not definitely established. Sir Aurel 
Stein surmizes one of these in the north to be a grain store. In the 
eastern group there is a half-open hall and a number of other rooms 
of various sizes and purposes. This is stated to be ‘ undoubtedly 
the main structure within the area enclosed by the ramparts, and © 
judging from the size of its halls and rooms, and the general arrange- 
ment of its plan,’ Sir Aurel Stein concludes that ‘it had served 
as the residence of the officer and establishment, for the protection 
of whom the fort must be supposed to have been primarily intended.”® 
There appears to have been some dwelling-houses to the south-east 
also, which had distinctly an upper storey. 

Sir Aurel Stein is doubtful if the whole structure could have been 
suggested by a Chinese Ya-men, because the disposition of the rooms, 


1 See Plate xxxvi, Ancient K, hotan, by Stein, Vol. II. 
2 [bid., I, p. 424. 8 Tbid., I, p. 432. 


_ 802 


INDIA AND ABROAD 
KHOTAN 


etc., is not compatible with Chinese : * 
It would look more like an Indian fort Sas ear 1 
centre and with other features noted above. ple in the 

The Endere stiipa, situated outside the fort towards the north- 
west, ‘consisted of a Square base, approximately oriented with its 
COMDES: and of a cylindrical dome rising above it. The base rose 
in three storeys according to the canonical arrangement previously 
explained, the lowest storey measuring 27 feet, with a height of 
1} feet. The next storey, receding 2 feet from the first and 6 feet 
high, formed the main portion of the base ; above, the third, only 
14 feet high, also receded by 2 feet. The dome had a diameter of 
16 feet, rising with its broken top to a height of 14 feet.” 

The date or rather the period of the antiquities in Eastern Turkestan 
has been fixed by Sir Aurel Stein with some definiteness. For this 
purpose he has taken into consideration not only the remains of 
ancient town-planning, buildings, sculptures, industrial arts, but 
also the languages and scripts (Kharoshthi, Indian Brahmi, Central 
Asian Brahmi, Tibetan, Chinese, and Hebrew) of the numerous 
manuscripts (and inscriptions) he has explored. 

‘The remains of the Rawak Vihara . . . enable us better than 
any other ruins . . . to realize what the plan and decorative aspect 
must have been of large Buddhist shrines in ancient Khotan. The 
affinity which the Rawak reliefs show in style and most details of execu- 
tion with the Graeco-Buddhist sculptures of Gandhara is far closer 
than that we have had occasion to observe in the plastic remains 
brought to light elsewhere. These considerations make it all the 
more important to determine the period, if only within approximate 
limits, to which the ruined vihara belongs. The fact of the Rawak 
sculptures approaching their Gandhara models much nearer than 
those of Dandan-Uiliq or Endere, and the total absence among them 
of any of those images with multiple limbs, etc., which characterize 
the later pantheon of Northern Mahayana Buddhism, may at once 
be accepted as a proof that they are older. But beyond this it would 
scarcely be safe to draw any further chronological conclusion from 
the evidence of the artistic remains themselves, seeing how scanty 
our data are for the chronology of Graeco-Buddhist sculpture in 
Gandhara itself, and how little we know as yet of the historical develop- 
ment of its offshoot transplanted to Eastern Turkestan.’ 


2 Ibid. I, p- 437: 8 [bid., I, p. 500. 
303 


1 Ancient Khotan, 1, p. 432+ 


CENTRAL ASIA HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


Although the Indian relics in Central Asia consist mostly of 
Buddhistic shrines, scanty remains of dwellings and forts are not 
altogether missing. In fact, in certain sites the existing dwelling. 
houses built according to old traditions are the only evidence of the 
past. ‘Outside it (old Kafir house at Dawawish) looked at first 
sight like a large heap of stones. But closer inspection showed walls 
far more solid than usual in these parts, built of uncut but well-set 
slabs of stone. The most striking feature inside was a large central] 
room or hall, showing elaborate carving on its massive pillars and 
along one wall decorative panelling in deodar. . .. The ornamen- 
tation chiefly consisted of a diaper of four-petalled flowers, closely 
resembling in style those . . . from the ancient wood-carvings of the 
Niya site and from Gandhara relievos. .. . The square pillars 
supported large corbels ending in elaborate volutes. . . . The opening 
in the centre of the roof (called aiwdn or kumal in Khowar), which 
alone admits light and air, showed the typical construction. It 
consists of successive overlapping courses of massive beams gradually 
reducing the square opening.’! 

The remains of another dwelling-house have been found within 
eleven yards of a shrine. ‘It consisted of a room built with walls 
of sundried bricks, and a small room and verandah adjoining it on 
the north. Both were constructed with timbers and plaster walls. 
The room, about 17 by 12 feet, still retained its substantially built 
clay fireplace, and in the corner beside it a plastered sitting plat- 
form. The roof was probably made of rafters and reed bundles.” 
At Niya site the remains of several other dwelling-houses have been 
discovered. In one of these ‘ the main room showed on three sides a 
sitting platform, 4 feet broad and 15 inches high, faced with sun- 
dried bricks 17 by: 12 by 3 inches.. There was found here a 
roughly carved round central pillar and a plain double-bracket, 
8 feet long and 74 inches wide, with ends curving upwards. . .- - 
In another room there was a wooden pillar, 5 feet high and oval 
in section, with a longer axis of g inches and the sides showing 
sixteen facets. The top, both in front and on the back, was decorated 
in rough bold chip-carving with a design showing a vase from 
which issued two long curving stems ending in broad leaves and 
fruit pendants’’, 


1 Serindia, I, pp. 35-36, Fig. 15, 16. 2 Ibid., I, p. 199. 3 [bid., p. 239: 
304 


PLATE XLV 


A Buppuist sTOPA OF Curao-Tzu Page 304 


Page 35 


A CLOSE-UP VIEW OF THE CAVES OF THE THOUSAND BUDDHAS 


INDIA AND ABROAD KHOTAN 


The idea of the central pillar (griha-stambha), around and by the 
standard of which the whole house used to be built, is a peculiarity 
of Hindu architecture, which has been specially referred to in the 
Ménasara and other Silpa-Sdstras. The round (oval) pillar with 
sixteen facets is also a peculiarity of Hindu architecture. The wooden 
econ of vane Fort, Endere site, are further examples of Hindu 
architecture. 

There is another larger house built partly in timber and plaster 
and partly with plastered rush walls. ‘Room, i, to the north-east, 
served as an office and yielded sixteen well-preserved Kharoshthi 
tablets, mostly wedge-shaped or rectangular. The adjoining looks 
like a fireplace. Outside the large room, v, yet within the fenced 
enclosure of a court or garden, lay the remains of long twisted vine 
branches. The cattle-shed is on the north-east.’ 

The remains of the old forts are scanty. No clear idea of the whole 
is available. ‘They appeared to have been constructed of large 
uncut stones . . . and to have formed an oblong of over 40 yards 
in length and about 17 yards across. At the Wakhan region 
there are similar remains of ‘three Kafir forts, which the natives 
believe to have been erected by the Guebers or fire-worshippers.’® 
They are known as Zamr-i-Atish-parast, Zangibar, and Kala-i-Kaka, 
the latter on the right bank of the Oxus.® 

The stipas of Chitral region are like those of Khotan. ‘ There 
are the characteristic three bases successively receding . - . above 
them the high cylindrical drum; next, a Projecting cornice sur- 
mounted by the proper stipa dome, which is approximately hemis- 
pherical in shape. Above the dome, in conventional outlines and 
drawn with a rather primitive attempt at perspective, appear the 
orthodox succession of ‘umbrellas,’ apparently seven, the lowest 
resting on supports which seem to slant outwards from the top of 
the dome. Through the last three of the umbrellas is seen passing 
the central pillar which in reality carried the whole series of umbrellas, 
and which, according to an early tradition, symbolized he beggar’s 
staff planted on the top of Buddha’s own stipa model. 


2 Tbid., pp. 237; 238. 
see ibid., plate 16. 4 Ibid., p. 36. 
6 Stein, Serindia, I. p. 66. 


1 Serindia, Fig. 70; PP: 236-37. 
8 For plan and disposition of rooms, 
5 Wood, Source of the Oxus, p- 218. 
7 [bid, 1, pp: 37> 56¢ Fig. 5- 

Ibid, 1, pp- 3 = 


CENTRAL ASIA HINDU ARCHITECTURE In 


The shrines of Khadalik resemble the Hindu temples. One of 
these as reconstructed! would look like the Linga type of temples 
described in the Silpa-sastras. It ‘formed a quadrangle of which the 
external measurements were 75 on the east and west, and 73 on 
the north and south. The middle of this quadrangle contained a 
cella, measuring on the inside a little over 28 feet. The centre of the 
cella was occupied by a badly decayed base or platform, 10} by oi 
feet. It rose in its completely broken state to a height of about 24 feet 
above the plastered floor. The space left between the outer walls and 
the cella, 21 feet on the north and south, and 20 on the other sides, 
seemed far too wide for the enclosing passage. . . . The remains 
revealed manifest remains of intermediate walls which seem to have 
divided this outer space into no less than three concentric passages.”® 
This shrine faces southwards. 

The next shrine, which is Buddhist, ‘ consisted of a rectangular cella, 
measuring 25 by 24 feet inside and enclosed by a passage 8 feet wide 
on the north and 5 elsewhere, with a large hall adjoining the south 
passage. The walls are of sundried bricks and were strengthened 
by wooden posts.’”® In the cella have been found some two dozens 
miniature stiipa models in clay, none higher than two inches. 

‘The structure immediately adjoining this shrine contained a 
single hall measuring some 47 by 42 feet. Its southern portion was 
occupied by a plastered platform, 15 feet wide, rising 10 inches above 
the floor. The foot of the platform showed a bold moulding 3 inches 
wide.’ 

A few more shrines of the same type existed in this region. But 
the scanty remains do not give a clear idea of the whole. Their 
Indian origin is, however, assured by many indications, including the 
use of Kharoshthi script and an early Prakrit language for adminis- 
trative purposes.* 

The Miran site discloses two kinds of ancient monuments. ‘ The 
ruined fort of Miran, imposing as was the appearance, rises on the 
pebble-covered plain which extends, with a total width of 3 miles, 
from the belt of the vegetation watered by the present course of the 
Miran stream eastwards to an ancient river-bed. It is of irregular 
shape and construction. Its walls still rise to a considerable height. 


1 See Fig. 6, Serindia, I, pp. 4-5. 2 Thid., 1, p. 156. 
3 Tbid., p. 157. 4 Thid., p. 243. 
306 


INDIA AND ABROAD KHOTAN 


beet) See eis about 240 feet each. The west and 
: 'y shorter, being about 168 and 200 feet 
a length. Projecting oblong bastions of irregular shape and varying 
dimensions protected the corners. It is, however, of comparatively 
late origin and of Tibetan type as disclosed by the finds of abundant 
Tibetan records.’2 

The other monuments of Miran are of Indian origin and comprise 
Buddhist shrines, including Stipa of the same pattern as in other 
sites, temple, remains of Buddhist sculptures, mural painting of a 
Buddhist legend in the cella, and Kharoshthi inscriptions. 

The main structure ‘ presented itself as a solid mound built of 
sundried bricks, oblong in shape, but showing no readily recogniz- 
able surface features. Two storeys, however, could at once be dis- 
tinguished, and of these the lower are measuring about 46 feet on 
its longer sides and a little over 36 feet on the shorter. Its height was 
about 9 feet above the original level of the ground. On the top of 
this solid platform or base there rose a second storey, also oblong in 
shape. Its ground-plan measured about 174 by 15 feet. The corners 
of the whole structure were roughly orientated towards the cardinal 
points. . . . The niches had once contained stucco statues in relievo, 
probably a little under life-size.* ‘This clearly proves that the 
architectural design of this decoration, which places relievo images in 
niches divided by Indo-Persian pilasters, is one directly borrowed 
from Graeco-Buddhist art.”® 

The colossal heads in soft stucco also showed the influence of 
Graeco-Buddhist sculpture ‘in modelling and proportions.’* The 
outer wall is lined with a row of colossal stucco images of Buddhas 
seated with cross-folded legs and usual pose (meditation, dhydnamudra) 
of the hands and drapery. ‘The statues measured 7 feet to 
7 feet 3 inches across the knees, which reached to a height of a little 
over a foot. The stucco bases occupied by the torsoes were 7 feet 6 
inches Jong and 2 feet 4 inches wide, and rose to a height of I foot 
and 4 inches. The spaces dividing them were only 6 to 7 inches 
across in front, but widened towards the wall behind.”® 

Further evidence of their Indian origin was supplied by the dis- 
covery of a palm-leaf pothi (book) written in Sanskrit language and 
Brahmi characters of an early Gupta type. 

dos ey Uae 2 Tbid., p. 485. 3 Ibid., p. 486. 

i a Se ets, Vol. I, pp. e687. 5 Thid., p. 488. 

$07 


CENTRAL ASIA HINDU ARCHITECTURE In 


‘The shrine, square outside but circular within, had once been 
surmounted by a dome and enclosed a small stépa in its centre. . , , 
The interior of the circular cella had been lit by windows passing 
through the centre of the side walls, which were approximately 
orientated to the south, east, and north. The width of the windows 
was 2 feet 3 inches, and their lowest portions reached down to a 
level of 2 feet 8 inches above the floor. The masonry enclosing the 
dome cella was 4 feet thick at the windows, increasing to fully ro 
feet where it filled the square corners. It consisted of sundried 
bricks mixed with straw, measuring 16 by 10 inches, with a thickness 
of 5 inches. The dome must once have surmounted the square 
cella, which was enclosed by an outside passage.”? 

‘The peculiarity of this séipa lies in the circular shape of the 
base instead of the usual square one. .. . It may be assumed that 
the choice of the round base, amply attested among the stipas of 
India and the north-west border, was due to considerations of the 
space available within the small circular cella.”? 

‘ On the lowest division of the base, 9 feet in diameter and 9g inches 
in height, there is placed a receding drum, 1 foot 6 inches high, ter- 
minated both below and above by a uniform series of mouldings. 
Then follows another plain division, 9 inches high and of the same 
diameter as the lowest, and above it a succession of small step-like 
mouldings, with a total height of less than 6 inches. From this rises 
the cylindrical member, about 2 feet 3 inches high which carries 
the dome, both being 6 feet 8 inches in diameter. The projecting 
frieze-like moulding, about 4 inches thick, which intervenes between 
drum and dome, is a feature seen with equal clearness in the stupa 
carving of Pakhtardini, the wooden stiipa models of Niya and 
Lonlan, etc.’® 

‘Considering the influence of the pradakshina custom it seems 
highly probable that the composition of the wall-paintings as a whole 
had its starting point on the left of the entrance to the cella and 
thus in the south-eastern segment.’ There are various kinds of 
figures, representation of riding prince, saddle and horse-gear of 
mount, princess driving quadriga, white elephant in sylvan scene, 
prince leading elephant, figures of armed men, animals, etc., 

1 Stein, Serindia, p. 493, Fig. 123,128. Ibid. p. 494, Fig. 126, 129, 130, 131+ 


8 bid., 494. (This seems to be the very last outpost of Buddhist Central Asian 
monuments.) 


308 


INDIA AND ABROAD ‘TUN-HUANG REGION 


representations of the story of Vessantara-jataka, Prince Vessantara’s 
exile, Indian ascetics with bushy hair and beards carrying the long 
staffs and small bowl for water (kamandalu), lastly, on a piece of 
frieze, 1s represented a low throne of the Indian gadi type, covered 
with drapery. There are also figures like a girl playing on a mando- 


line, girl carrying decanter, bearded male head, bust of Indian 
prince, etc.? 


Tun-HuANG REGION 


Sir Aurel Stein has frequently referred to this site.? ‘To the south- 
east of its main oasis, at the foot of a barren dune-covered hill-chain, 
there lies the sacred site the ‘Caves of the Thousand Buddhas.’ 
Buddhist piety from about the fourth century A.D. onwards has 
here honey-combed the rock walls of a true thebais with hundreds of 
cave-shrines, still objects of worship.’ Their decoration with frescoes 
and stucco sculptures is very rich. In other respects also they would 
resemble the famous caves at Ajanta, Elora, and other places. 

‘Along the whole length of the scarp of the hill the precipitous 
portion of the rock-face shows an unbroken succession of grottoes 
(some 515 in number). Some high, some low, they are all closely 
serried laterally, and in most parts perched also one above the other. 
But the number of grottoes varies greatly in height. . . . At both 
the northern and southern ends the rock-face displays only a single 
line of cave-temples, while four or five successive tiers may be counted 
elsewhere. Only for short distances and between the two shrines 
containing colossal Buddha statues it is possible to recognize regular 
rows or storeys. The two last-mentioned temples stand in a separate 
category by themselves; for in order to secure adequate space for 
the giant clay images of seated Buddhas close on go feet high which 
they were meant to shelter, a number of halls were excavated one 
above the other. Each of these provides light and access for a portion 
of the colossus, which rises unbroken to the top through a continuous 
cavity at the back.’ 

‘In front of most of the shrines there had been originally ante- 
chapels or porches of oblong shape carved out of the rock. Their 


1 Serindia, I, pp. 517, 518, 519, 520, 521, Fig. 127, 133, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138. 
2 Tbid., I.) pp» 525» 529, 527, Fig. 139, 140, 141, 143. 

3 [bid., I., Chap. XXII, XXIV, XXV. 

4 [bid., I., Introduction, p. xii. See The Portfolio of Thousand Buddhas, by Stein, 


Plates i-xlviii. 


399 


CENTRAL ASIA HINDU ARCHITECTURE ty 


back and side walls, as well as the ceilings, still retained paintings ip 
tempera. . . . In most cases access to, and communication between 
these upper shrines seems to have been assured by means of wooden 
galleries, now marked only by the wooden rafters which once served 
to support them, or more frequently still by the mere holes into which 
they were fixed. The rock-cut or wooden stairs, which were re- 
quired for the same purpose, had crumbled away almost everywhere, 
and even rough ladders were to be found only before a few caveg 
which had undergone manifestly recent restoration. . . . The interior 
arrangements and decoration of these upper shrines, mostly of modest 
size, did not differ in any essential way from those prevailing in the 
cave-temples: carved into the foot of the cliff.’+ 

_ ©The ground-plan and general structural arrangement of these 
caves showed a striking uniformity. Outside there came first a kind 
of oblong ante-chapel. . . . Where restoration had taken place 
recently, the front had been closed by a wooden construction with 
big doors and windows, and this feature is likely to have been present 
also in the original design. From this ante-chapel the cave-temple 
proper was approached through a high and rather wide passage, 
which alone admitted light and air to the interior excavation. This 
consisted everywhere of a single rectangular cella, usually almost 
square in:shape and with sides up to 54 feet in length, hewn out 
of the solid rock and provided with a high conical roof. Within the 
cella, which is usually a little deeper than it is wide, the larger 
shrines had generally a big rectangular platform, elaborately deco- 
rated in plaster and facing the entrance.”* 

‘The centre was invariably occupied by a colossal stucco image of 
Buddha, by the side of which were grouped in a symmetrical fashion 
statues of smaller divinities, all of them often badly injured .. . 
usually a kind of screen and canopy combined had been left standing 
in the rock at the back of the principal image. Behind this, and 
between the platform and the cella walls, a passage was invariably 
left for the worshippers to perform the circumambulation (pradak- 
shina). In the smaller shrines similar groups of stucco images, with 
a seated Buddha in their centre, were ordinarily found placed in 
a kind of alcove or raised chapel. Only in a few instances a third type 
of internal arrangement was in vogue by which the centre of the cella 


1Stein, Serindia, II, p. 793. 2 Tbid., p. 794. 
310 


PLATE XLVII 


A GENERAL VIEW OF THE VALLEY oF THE MyriAD BuppHAs Page 310 


PLATE XLVIII 


FRESCO DECORATION IN THE INTERIOR OF A CAVE TEMPLE IN THE CAVES OF THE pote 
THousanp BuppHAs 


INDIA AND ABROAD TUN-HUANG REGION 


was left unexcavated and the square block of rock used as a backing 
for statues.”! 

The wall-paintings are all executed in tempera. ‘ It is in this modi- 
fied, technically inaccurate, sense that the term ‘fresco’? must be 
understood. The mural decoration in the passages and ante-chapels 
ordinarily represents rows of large Bodhisattvas moving in pro- 
cession, or else seated in tiers. Diapers of small figures of Buddhas 
and Bodhisattvas . . . covered the walls in numbers of small cellas. 
Along with elaborate floral designs and tracery they had often been 
used also for the adornment of the ceiling in the large cellas. But 
it was on the walls of these last that the wonderful richness and 
variety of this pictorial art had found room to express itself fully. 
There the frescoes generally filled large panels, bordered by floral 
scrolls of striking beauty. They were arranged either singly or in 
a series. Painted dados, often representing figures of worshippers, 
in some cases monks or nuns, served to raise these panels to an appro- 
priate height above the floor and the statue-bearing platform. Panels 
were almost invariably filled by elaborate compositions containing 
a large number of figures. Varied as the subjects were in details, two 
main classes could readily be distinguished among them. In one 
there appeared figures of Buddhas, surrounded by symmetrically 
grouped hosts of Bodhisattvas, saints, and other divine attendants, 
all shown in a carefully arranged architectural setting of pavilions, 
platforms, lotus tanks, etc. These panels were meant to represent 
scenes in Buddhist heavens. The other class of fresco panels dis- 
played, in close juxtaposition and often bewildering variety, ee 
which looked as if taken from mundane life, but often with sacr 
figures moving among them.’ Sir Aurel Stein felt aspen 
‘these scenes in the mural paintings illustrated Buddhist Jataka 

ope aa 
There is another similar group of cave temples near eoentued: 
known as the ‘ valley of Myriad Buddhas. This collection a ae 
temples ‘could not compare in extent and importance wi is 
of the Thousand Buddhas.’* ‘ What the site lacks in size seemed, 


1 Stein, Serindia, I, p- 794- i ijn Foua 
; A Figs. 200, 214, 211, 212, 216, 217, 218, 219, 
Hoes = re osc ne na Hoon 220, 224, 231, 235, 217, 218, 221, 222, 
Bee ae oe For detailed descriptions, see pp. 847-91. 
23 F) : 
3 Ibid. Vol, III, p. 1109. 


3II 


CENTRAL ASIA HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


says Sir Aurel Stein, ‘to be made up by the singular wildness of its 
setting.’ 

The temple grottoes of Wan-fo-hsia extend for a distance of over 
a quarter of a mile. ‘The condition of the sacred site harmonizeq 
very pleasantly with the picturesque seclusion and peace of this 
submontane thebais.? Numerous small shrines lay scattered along 
a raised terrace at the foot of the cliffs on the right bank of a river, 
None of the grottoes measured over 16 feet square and most of them 
10 by 12 feet. In all essential points of architectural disposition and 
artistic decoration they ‘ show the closest resemblance to the average 
type of Chien-fo-tung shrines approximately assigned to the ninth- 
tenth century.”* 

‘The principal caves are found on the right bank ranged in two 


rows. The lower one opens on a terrace, about 20 feet above the 
river, the other extends on a level about 50 to 60 feet higher. The 
series of five main caves below starts on the south-east with one 
containing a colossal seated Buddha image, which rises up into the 
second storey. Next to it is a cave with a colossal figure of Buddha 
recumbent in nirvdna, fully 30 feet long. The five caves of the lower 
storey are supplied with verandahs in front and rendered very dark 
thereby.’ 

‘ The subjects of the larger panels appear to be chiefly assemblies 
of Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, set within a square frame of geometric 
design, and this again enclosed within a circle or oval of elaborate 
floral pattern. . . . The lower main caves, together with five or six 
small grottoes between them, containing new frescoes, are the shrines 
which receive most attention from resident priests and pious visitors.” 

‘The upper row of caves is approached by flights of stairs roughly 
cut into the rock, which start near some small grottoes serving 
as quarters for the priests. There is a line of 12 cave temples 
extending on a uniform level. All of them comprise a cella, square 
or nearly so, with sides varying from 20 to 32 feet ; an ante-chapel, 
itself as broad as the cella, but only of moderate depth and separated 
from the cella by a shallow wide passage ; a high porch or outer 
passage, in some cases 20 to 30 feet deep where it is intact, admitting 
light and air from the face of the cliff. The shrines originally com- 
municated with each other by means of narrow plastered passages 
leading from one porch to the other through the facing part of the 


* Stein, Serindia Vol. III, p. 1109. 2 bid., Vol. III, p. 1109, Fig. 242, 243, 244. 
3 Tbid., p. 1110. 


312 


INDIA AND ABROAD TUN-HUANG REGION 


rock wall. But where this had crumbled away or become unsafe, 
a rough tunnel connecting the ante-chapels had been driven through 
the rock. The uniformity with which this disposition is repeated in 
all shrines points to execution upon a definite plan and at no great 
distance of time, and with this the uniform style of their decoration 
seems in full accord.’! 

‘Throughout these cave-temples the walls bear paintings in 
tempera. . . . The walls of the porches ordinarily display on the 
one side rows of men dressed in dark-red robes with wide-brimmed 
black hats ; and, on the other, processions of ladies wearing rich wide- 
sleeved dresses and elaborate coiffure with flowers, bands, and pen- 
dants around bulb-shaped caps. These figures carrying offerings, 
which also recur on the side walls of the entrances to the cellas, 
are intended to represent donors and donatrices. The walls of the 
cellas and ante-chapels are decorated either with processions of large, 
richly robed Bodhisattvas moving under ornate canopies or with 
a variety of panels, showing familiar scenes from Buddhist Heavens, 
Buddhas enthroned among rows of Bodhisattvas, large Tepresenta- 
tions of Mafijuéri and Samanta-bhadra on their vahanas, etc.” 

‘The remaining shrines of the series are very small and dark. 
The side walls of cella of one of these (xix) are decorated with 
scenes from Buddhist Heavens and the back wall is occupied by a 
large representation of the ‘ wind-scene.’ There are inseripdons in 
cursive Brahmi, scribbled by the side of a donor figure. 

These shrines of myriad Buddhas resemble in other peel so 
the Caves of the Thousand Buddhas. And both appear e ae ee 
largely influenced by, if not one from, the cave-temples of India, 
pehaegaamea sr eee a pete of Buddhist stupas and 

There are also other smalle eA ae 
viharas in several sites. There are Buddhis 2 ae isis Koppie 
Turfan, Yar-Khoto, mostly near the northern en oF epee: 

d beyond it. They consist of the central temple p 
pec ciaeae isee larce Buddhist vihdra, and the central group 
of the enclosing aoe nae Buddhist sanctuary.4 At Kara-shahr 
OH spas Oe i including several massive temple 
there is a large ae oS eee “ther, structures aaustly 
ruins. There are also S$ 


i india, III, pp. 1110-11. : Bee A 
eae II, ue Fig. 246, 247° 8 Jbid., III, p 3 
« Wid, I, pp. 1168-1 169, Fig. 278, 279- 


313 


CENTRAL ASIA HINDU ARCHIT. ECTURE | WN 


of modest size.1 There are small cellas above the springs. There are 
also cave temples.2 At Shorchuk, also, there have been discovered a 
ruined shrine, together with the ante-chapel and cella with relievo 
statues and circular image base, temple ruin, ruined siipa, stucco 
reliefs, and stucco relievo sculptures.* There is here also a cave 
temple.* Buddhist shrines have also been found at Khora site.5 Lastly 
at Mayaklik there are remains of Buddhist. shrine, Buddha Statue, 
Buddha image with painted base, and tempera painting.® 

There appears to be no doubt about the fundamental influence 
of Hindu culture on the art and architecture of these Central Asian 
colonies. Sir Aurel Stein is equally emphatic on this point also, 
‘The most thorough proof of the dominating influence which 
Indian art exercised on the industries represented in this ancient 
settlement, was supplied by,’ in addition to purely architectural 
and sculptural objects, ‘the ornamental wood-carving of the chair.” 
... Lhe height of the legs is 23 inches and the width of the chair 
26 inches. . . . The great interest of this ancient piece of furniture 
lies in its ornamental carving, which shows the closest resemblance 
to decorative motives familiar from Gandhara reliefs. Referring 
for all details of the carving to the description given in the list, I 
may point out,’ he continues, ‘that the four-petalled flower of a 
shape closely approaching the large purple clematis, which forms 
its most frequent feature, is well known in Gandhara sculptures. 
We find it then,’ he concludes by referring to their essential features, 
“either complete and enclosed in squares forming ornamental bands, 
or else halved and placed within triangular spaces just as seen on the 
panels and legs of the chair.’® The zigzag arrangement of these halved 
flowers has also its exact parallel there. ‘The eight-petalled lotus,’ he 
emphatically asserts, ‘is unmistakably Indian, while the central 
ornament of the front panel, with its conventionalized fruit (? pome- 
granate) and leaves, recalls decorative elements on certain Indo- 
Corinthian capitals.’® 

a ps : 

RTE Sy tists tm tet 

* Ibid., Fig. 289, 290, 291, 292, 293, 294, pp. 1192-93. 

4 Tbid., Fig. 298, p. 1199. 5 [bid., Fig. 300, p. 1224. 

§ Ibid., Fig. 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 328, pp. 1276-77, 1286-87. 

7 Preserved in the British Museum, London, Plate Ixviii, Ancient Khotan, Vol. II. 

8 Cf., Foucher, L’Art de Gandhara, 1, Fig. 313 (sculptures from Loriyan-Tengat, 
Griimwedat, Burgess, Buddhist Art. Fig. 94). 

%Stein, Ancient Khotan, I, p. 334. 


O14 


INDIA AND ABROAD 


SWAT 
SWAT 


The valleys drained by the Swat tiver, together with the adjacent 
territory of Buner to the south-east, correspond to the ancient 
Uddiyana or Udyana. The great fame attaching to this country in 
Buddhist tradition is amply attested by the records of the Chinese 
Buddhist pilgrims, as well as by manifold notices in literature of 
northern Buddhism.1 

The ruins consist of the Buddhist stipa of Top-dara,? small vihara 
at Gumbatuna,? Balo, Kandag Valley, Bir-kot,4 ruined stipa and 
monastery walls of Barrage, Tokar-Dar,® ruined mansions, dwellings 
and tower, monastic court, on ridge above Kotah,® ruined stipa of 
Amluk-dara and of King Uttarasena, Shankardara,’ fortifications and 
ruined towers on Birkot Hill,® ruined stipa of Shinasi near Batera,® 
Buddha’s Foot-print near Tirat.2° 

The architectural details of these ruins are similar to those des- 
cribed elsewhere and need no repetition here. The only points to be 
noted are that they are of Indian origin and that the local peculiarities 
are few. 


1 Sir Aurel Stein, Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of India, no. 42, p. I. 

2 Ibid., Fig. 1, p. 6. 3 [bid., Fig. 5, p. 8. 4 Ibid., Fig. 6, 7, p- 12. 

5 Tbid., Fig. 8, 9, p. 14, Fig. 10, 11, -p 16. 8 [bid., Fig. 12, 13, 14, p. 18. 
7 Ibid., Fig. 16, 17, p. 20. S Ibid., Fig. 20, 22, pp. 24, 28. 

9 [bid., Fig. 34, p. 44. 10 [bid Fig. 40, p. 54. 


39 


CHAPTER X 


HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN INSULINDIA OR INDIAN 
ARCHIPELAGO 


THE DERIVATION OF the term ‘Insulindia’ is not clear. Nor is 
there any general agreement about its geographical limits, Writers 
from time to time have used the term to imply various regions, 
Here it is used, for the sake of convenience, to indicate the mainland 
and islands to the east of the Indian continent, which, though now 
peopled by non-Indian races, professed Indian culture, both religious 
and secular, from time to time. The geographical boundaries and 
local names of the territories constituting the peninsular and insular 
regions have naturally changed with the change of governing author- 
ities, and the monumental remains of the Hindu-Buddhist period 
have also suffered both from neglected indifference and deliberate 
destruction. Whatever traces, with inevitable modifications, of Hindu 
architecture have survived in some parts of the peninsula and the 
islands will show not only their Indian connexion, but also may 
supplement what have become extinct in India itself and what can 
only be recognized by a reference to the Silpa-Sastras and literary 
sources of information. 

The peninsula east of India is stated, on the basis of ancient 
inscriptions of an early date, to have included six regions, states or 
kingdoms: (1) Yavana-deSa, in the north-east, with its capital 
Chudha-nagari, now Luang Phrabang, on the Me-kong; (2) 
Champa-deSa, corresponding to Annam and extending to about 
160 miles westwards of the Me-kong ; (3) Syama-deéa, in the north- 
west, including Burma proper and the northern part of modern 
Siam east of the Salwin, of which Haripunyapura, now Lamphum 
on the Me-ping, was probably the capital; (4) Kambhoja-deéa 
included all Cambodia, Lower Cochin China, and Siam as far as 
Uttaradih ; (5) Ramanya-defa, on the west, comprised Pegu and 
Tenasserim ; and (6) Malaya-deéa, the Malay Peninsula. 


1 Fournereau, Le Siam Ancient, Part I, pp. 50 ff. quoted by Fergusson, History of 
Indian and Eastern Architecture (1910), Vol. II, PP: 373-374. 


316 


INDIA AND ABROAD BURMA 


‘The Nagarakyitagama and the Pararaton supply a list of the 
countries which belonged to the Majapahit kings, comprising all 
the islands between Java and New Guinea, including Borneo, Celebes, 
Buton, Buru, Ceram (Ambon), Banda, Banggai, Moluccas, Talaut, 
then the petty islets between Borneo and Malaya Peninsula, including 
Kedah, Kelang, Singapore, Penang, Kelantan, etc.”! 

This list includes most of the islands, except Sumatra, Bali, and 


a few others, where remains of Indian architecture have been 
discovered. 


BurMA 


Brahma-deSa, as the term would indicate, was situated in the 
Brahma-sthana, or the centre of the then world. It is bounded on 
the west by India, on the north by China, on the east by Siam, and 
on the south by the Indian Ocean. In the historical period, Burma 
formed part of Siam and was inhabited by the same races of people. 
Burma was first of those countries which adopted the religion of 
Gautama Buddha at a very early period. It ‘ borrowed also many 
of the Indian forms of architecture,’ probably from the Lower Bengal 
Provinces, which have become extinct in the land of their origin 
and present difficulty in explaining the differences. 

The architectural history of Burma is stated to begin with the 
foundation of Pagan in the middle of the ninth century. Its glory 
lasted for about four centuries until it was destroyed in 1284 by the 
Chinese or Tartar army of Kublai Khan.® 

The ancient buildings in Burma are known by a curious expression, 
pagoda, coined by the early European visitors. The term : Pagoda ’ 
(Paya in Burmese) “seems to be applied by Europeans in Burma 
indifferently to two very different kinds of structure, Bamcly, the 
bell-shaped stipas, and the square temples.’ The former was raised 
on a series of terraces or platforms and crowned with a conical 
finial. To these the term ‘ Tsedi,’ or ‘ Zedi,’ which corresponds with 
the Chaitya in Nepal, and Chedi of Siam, is sometimes given. The 
latter was a type of ‘ temple which is square on plan with some- 
times projecting porches or vestibules, and, in the thickness of the 
walls, marrow corridors, the walls of which are decorated with 

3°Yule, Marco Palo, Vol. II, pp. 84 ¢f seq. 


317 


INDIAN ARCHIPELAGO HINDU ARCHI TECTURE IN 


frescoes or sculpture, with niches at intervals containing images of 
Buddha. Their roofs are pyramidal, consisting of a series of storeys 
of moderate height set back one behind the other and crowned with 
the curvilinear Sikhara of the Indo-Aryan,’ or northern style prac- 
tised both by ‘ Jains and Hindus in the north of India, from the 
mouth of the Indus to the Bay of Bengal.” 

The earliest of the circular pagodas, or chattyas, is that at By- 
paya, at Pagan, ascribed to the first years of the third century a.p, 
‘ The centre portion, or bell, is of bulbous form, raised on a triple 
base and crowned with two features, the lower one a bold torus 
moulding, the upper one a conical finial, with cavetto Sinkings 
between the bell and the torus, and between the latter and the 
finial.’? 

The Banbangy pagoda of the seventh or eighth century, Ngakwe 
Nadaung of the tenth century, Shwe Dagon at Rangoon, Shwe- 
Hmaudan pagoda at Pegu, and several others are examples of this 

oe 

a The principal variations made in the design of the Zedi (chaitya) 
are those of the relative proportion of the bell to the east of the struc- 
ture, the outline of the same and its superstructure, and the decora- 
tion employed. Thus in the Lokananda Pagoda in Pag4n, built 
by Anaurahta in 1059, the bell is of immense size, being three- 
sevenths of the total height of the structure, including the triple base 
and finial.’4 

‘Some of the pagodas have in the centre of each face a flight 
of steps leading to the upper terraces, and on the level of the first 
platform an arch-way similar to the examples in Boro-Budur. In 
one or two cases also there are porches in front of each flight of steps, 
cruciform in plan, similar to those of the temples of Cambodia.’® 

The history of the Shwe Dagon pagoda at Rangoon would explain 
the growth of most of the Burmese pagodas. ‘ Originally it is said to 
have been only 27 feet high and to have attained its present height 


1 Fergusson, loc. cit., Vol. II, p. 341. 2 Tbid., pp. 341-342. 

8 A crowd of smaller pagodas of all sizes, from 30 feet to 200 feet in height, 
surrounds the larger one. In fact there is scarcely a village in the country that 
does not possess one or two of these structures, and in all the more important towns 
they are numbered by hundreds. They are in fact innumerable (Fergusson, p. 348). 
For a en of the pagodas at Thaton and Prome, see Fergusson, pp. 357-359» 
359-300. 

4 Fergusson, loc. cit., Vol. II, p. 343. 5 Jbid., p. 344. 


318 


INDIA AND ABROAD BURM 
A 


ts iets Sie aes ese eo ee 

y the height of the pagoda was 
raised to 129 feet, terraces were built round the hill and the t 
a platform—was paved with flagstones. In 1768 it reached it ee 
height of 321 feet, not including th Hti i See ey 

» No g the new Hti, which was presented 
by king Mindon Min. The platform now measures goo feet b 
685, feet and rises about 165 feet above the base of the hill.’ Z 
eee Rs aac ‘to have been SorrenenG ne about 2,300 years ago, 
€ era of Buddha himself.’ Its antiquity is further in- 
dicated by the belief that it contained in its Dhatu-Garbha (relic- 
chamber) not only eight hairs from the head of the last (Gautama) 
Buddha, but also relics of his three predecessors. ‘ After numerous 
miraculous indications, on this spot were discovered the staff of 
Kakusandha, believed to have lived some 3,000 years 3.c., the 
water-dipper of Konagamana, and the bathing garment of Rastape 
which, with the eight hairs above mentioned, are enshrined within 
this great pagoda.’2 . 

The Mingun-paya is the other huge pagoda commenced by 
Bodauhpaya, who spent twenty-five years over it and died in 1819, 
leaving it incomplete. It represents the square form borrowed from 
early Indian Buddhism. ‘ It stands on a basement of five successive 
terraces, of little height, the lower terrace forming a square of 450- 
feet. From the upper terrace starts the vast cubical pile of the 
pagoda, 230 feet square in plan, and rises, in a solid mass, to the 
height of about 100 feet, with slightly sloping walls. Above this it 
contracts in successive terraces, three of which had been completed, 
raising the mass to a height of 165 feet at the time the work was 
abandoned.” ‘If completed, it would have risen to the ‘height of 
500 feet. It is even now a solid mass containing between 6,000,000 
and 7,000,000 cubic feet of brick work. Had it been carried out, 
it would have been the tallest building in the world.”® 

The Lemyet-hna, built in the eighth and ninth centuries, is the 
earliest example of the square temples. ‘It is about 24 feet square 
and is built in brick, with a solid pier 8 feet square in the centre, 
surrounded by a corridor 4 feet wide. On each face of the pier are 


1 Asiatic Researches, Vol. XIV, p. 270, referred to by Fergusson, loc. cit., 
Vol. II, p. 347- 

2 Mission to the Court of Ava, p. 169. 

3 Fergusson, loc. cit., Vol. Il, p. 35!- 


379 


INDIAN ARCHIPELAGO HINDU ARCHITECTURE iy 


bas-reliefs carved in stone which are lighted from four entrance 
doorways, one on each side of the temple.’* : 

‘ The two most interesting temples of this class are those at Nan 
Paya and Nagayon, just south of Pagan. The first is considered a) 
have been built by king Anaurahta about 1050 and the second 
by Kyantsiltha in 1064.’ 

‘Tt is, however, remarkable, considering the close connexion 
between India and Burma, so far as architectural style is concerned 
to find the arch and vault employed systematically throughout fhe 
latter country in buildings many of which are said to have been 
built by Indian workmen, and further to note that those features 
appear only when they became an actual necessity, as in doorways 
requiring wide openings, or the covering cover of corridors and 
small internal chambers with a permanent incombustible material 
to carry these roofs. Those roofs were, as a rule, in the square temples, 
not flat terraces, but assumed an ogee section following the rise of the 
yault.”2 This is shown in the temples of Ananda, the Kyanktaugyi, 
and Abhayadana, south of Pagan.® 

The Ananda is the most remarkable of some 800 to 1,000 temples 
of Pagan ruins which ‘ extend about 8 miles in length along the river, 
with an average breadth of about 2 miles.’ It is stated to have been 
built by Kyantsittha (1057-1085). ‘It is a square of nearly 200 
feet on each side, with projecting porticos on each face, so that it 
measures 280 feet across each way. It is several storeys in height, 
the two lower ones are square with square turrets at each end, the 
three above have seated lions at each angle. The plan of these storeys, 
as also the base of the Sikhara, follows that of the latter, being set 
back at the angles. The Sikhara is crowned with the conical finial 
and Hti. The setting back of each storey, one behind the other, gives 
the whole a pyramidal form, which in this case rises to the height 
of 183 feet.’ 

‘Internally the building is extremely solid, being intersected only 
by two narrow parallel corridors, but in rear of each projecting 
transept is a niche artificially lighted from above, in which stands 
a statue of Buddha more than 30 feet in height.”4 


1 Fergusson, Joc. cit., Vol. II, p. 352. 2Tbid., p. 353- 
3Jbid., Plate XLI, XXXVIII, XXXVI. 
4 Ibid., pp. 360-361, Plate XLI. 


320 


INDIA AND ABROAD BURMA 


This is the arrangement in the Chaumukh temple at Palitana 
and at Ranpur,? both Jain temples of the fifteenth and seventeenth 
centuries, while the Ananda temple belongs to the eleventh century 
(A.D. 1066). This apparent anomaly is explained by the fact that 
the general basic principle was borrowed from India and the forms 
were unlike. 

Of the other temples? at Pagan, the Mahabodhi was built by Nand- 
aungmya Min in A.D. 1198 in imitation of the Bodh-Gaya temple. 

There is, however, remarkable dissimilarity between the generality 
of temples at Pagan and their Indian originals. ‘They are not 
stiipas in any sense of the term, nor are they vzharas.’? The seven- 
storeyed prasdda at Polonnaruva, however, appears to be exact 
original of Pagan temples, the resemblance being so striking.’$ 

There are two other classes of religious structures, known as the 
Thein and the Pitakat-Taik. The former is the ordination hall for 
priests, which would seem to correspond with the Bot of Siam, except 
that they are not as a rule found in the temple enclosure, as in the 
latter country. The Upali-Thein in Pagan, dating from the thirteenth 
century, is ‘rectangular on plan and is divided into nave and side 
aisles by arcades and arches. The centre aisle or nave is loftier than 
the side aisles, and in section the structure is similar to that of a 
Chaitya temple (or of a Christian church, except that there are no 
clerestory windows). The summit of the roof is decorated with 
terra-cotta ridge tiles, and in the centre is an attenuated dagaba. 
On the top of the nave and aisle walls is a cresting or pierced para- 
pet similar to that which crowns the terrace walls of the pagodas. 
The interior is said to be decorated with fine and brilliant frescoes.”4 

There are other examples also. The Pitakat-Taik is the sacred 
library at Pagan, which was built by Anaurahta in 1057 to house the 
Buddhist scriptures that he brought away from Thaton. ‘It was 
probably built by the masons whom he brought over from Thaton, 


1 XXII, Fergusson, Vol. II, p. 47. ‘ } 
ie ane famous pales at Pagan are Dhammayangyi (built by Narethu 


i inuyu (built by Alaungsithu, a.p. 1144). Y 
Bn Ta refuel orale (perpas on, Vole} I, p. 246) and Pitakat-Tatk, 
Plate XL (Fergusson, Nolet 356357): 

one soe Ho Ve Ben “Golden Ghersonese of classical Beveapher, 
situated on the Sittang River, about 40 miles north of Sela: pecs Ap: 

by Anaurahta, King of Pegu (Phoenix, Vol. II, pp. 204 ¢ $0.4 Gf. A. S. B., 

Vol. XLII, pp. 23 et seq., Fergusson, loc. eit., Vol. II, pp. 357-358). 

But Sumatra is better known as Suvarna Bhimi. 


32 I Yu 


INDIAN ARCHIPELAGO HINDU ARCHITECTURE In 


professed Brahmanism.’ There is, however, reason to suppose that 
despite all the ancient stone inscriptions found in the region peopled 
by the Khmers being purely south Indian (Dravidian) both in 
lettering and language, ‘the first great influx of Indians into this 
region dated from the time of king Asoka’s invasion of Kalinga 
and that the settlers were natives of Kalinga’ and ‘formed colonies 
at various points along the coasts of the countries now known as Pegu, 
Siam, Cambodia, and Cochin-China.’! This view has been further 
substantiated by Fergusson when he says of Burma that it ‘ adopted 
the religion of Sakyamuni (Buddha) and borrowed also many of the 
Indian forms of architecture, but with differences we are now at a 
loss to account for. It may be that, as we know nothing practically 
of the architectural forms of the lower Bengal provinces before the 
beginning of the sixth century, these forms may have been taken 
to Prome and Pegu before that time ’* and may have migrated also 

to Siam. 

Support to this view is received also from the Mahdvamsa’s list 
of ten Buddhist missionaries sent forth to various parts of the world 
by king Asoka, including Suvarna-bhimi (land of gold), variously 
identified with ‘ the region extending from Pegu right down through 
the Malay Peninsula,’ with ‘ southern Siam,’ and also with the 
island of Sumatra. Further, ‘ Prince Damrong and other competent 
authorities believe that the original stupa over which the existing 
large pagoda of Nak’on Prat’om was built dates from the time of 
king Asoka.’ General Wood quotes Hiuen Tsang to the effect 
that king Siladitya of Kanoj sent missionaries to foreign countries, 
who must have visited Siam also ‘since images peculiar to that 
period have been discovered at Nak’on Prat?om, Nak’on Srit’am- 
marat, and in other parts of Siam.”* 

According to a Tamil inscription® of the eighth or ninth century 
A.D. Indian merchants appear to have been in trade-relation with 
Siam in the early centuries of the Christian era, and they are stated 
to be the Tamil Vaishnava soldiers who settled in Siam and built 
the temple of Vishnu there.® 


1 Wood, loc. cit., pp. 42, 43- 

2 James Fergusson, History of Indian and Eastern Architecture (1910), Vol. II. p- 339: 
3 Wood, loc. cit., pp. 43-44. 4 Ibid., 45-46. 

5E, Hultsch, Note on a Tamil Inscription in Siam, F. R. A. S. (1913), PP- 337-339 
6 Bose, loc. cit., p. 21. 


324 


INDIA AND ABROAD SIAM 


The architectural remains of Indian origin are very scanty and 
ERAS Siam, especially in comparison with those in the neighbouring 
countries of Champa and Cambodia. In fact the Hindu monuments 
consist of a few unimportant temples and images of Vishnu, Lakshmi, 
Siva, and others. Even the Buddhist monuments are rather unim- 
portant architecturally, but numerous in number, and include 
monasteries, stiipas, chaityas, pagodas, and images of Buddha. 

Temples at Sukhodaya, Phra, Pathom, Sajjanalaya, Ayuthia, Lopha- 
buri, Sangkalok, and Bangkok have been referred to by travellers 
and historians. There are various structures built within the enclo- 
sures of temples. Their general classification and description may be 
gathered from an account of any one temple. 

‘The outer enclosure of a temple was always rectangular, and 
generally of greater length than width. The enclosure walls were 
as a rule about 3 feet thick, and from 12 to 14 feet high. The most 
important building in the vdt (enclosure) was the bot (the sacred 
temple) and usually the first built. The bot was rectangular in 
plan, and was divided into central and side aisles by columns in stone, 
carrying open timber roofs covered with glazed tiles in bright colours. 
The roofs over the side aisles were at a lower level than that of the 
central aisles, leaving space for a clerestory, which consisted of 
pierced terra-cotta slabs. Similar perforated screens were built 
in between the outer columns of the aisles. In important temples 
the bot had double aisles on each side.’ 

‘The principal feature in the bot, admission to which was con- 
fined to the priests, was the great altar carrying a gilded statue of 
Buddha, which was always placed in the central aisles, in the last 

but one.’ 
ee like the ordinary shrine, the bot (of Vat Jai at Sukhodaya) 
stood opposite the main entrance in the east and had a porch i 
front. ‘In its rear was the principal phra (stiipa) of the ee 
of which there were two types of design,* the phra-pr ang and - 
phra-chedi. The former is of a type peculiar to Siam, ooh. ha 
way up is the cell, with its entrance door on the eastern si 5 ees 
to which was obtained by a steep flight of steps, and recessed niches 
ther sides.’ Thus it differed in many essential respects 
on fe ee in Indi Burma. ‘ The top, or upper part, 
from similar structures in India or burma. > 


1 Fergusson, loc. cit., Plate XLVI. 


325 


INDIAN ARCHIPELAGO HINDU ARCHITECTURE ry 


has a domical shape, which we can easily fancy to be derived from 
the stipa, but the upright part looks more like the stkhara of a Hindy 
temple than anything Buddhist.’ 

‘The phra-chedi (of Vat Jai at Sukhodaya) is based apparently 
on the stipas of India, the cells containing the relics of Buddha 
however, being placed underground, and reached in the larger 
examples by secret passages in the thickness of the walls. The enor- 
mous structures now existing of the Pathom chedi is the second 
enclosure or envelope of the original chedi, and rises to the height 
of 344 feet. It is surrounded by a triple gallery with numerous 
pavilions, the roofs of which were in the last rebuilding (of 1862) 
copied from those of Angkor Vat in Cambodia.” 

The vihdns (viharas) and kamburiens are similar in design to the 
bot, but smaller in size. Therein also people assembled to offer up — 
prayers and listen to sermons. 

There are two other types of buildings found only in the royal 
temples. They are known as chuttamukk, that is, chaturmukha (four- 
faced), and mora-dob, mondob, i.e. mandapa or pavilion, both 
elaborately described in the Ménasdara Silpa-Sdstra. ‘The former, 
cruciform (svastika) in plan, was originally built to shelter a statue 
of the four-faced Brahma; this has been destroyed, and its place 
taken by four niches, placed back to back, each with a statue of 
Buddha facing the cardinal points.’ The finest example is stated to 
have been found in the Vat Mandapa Si Na at Sajjanalaya. 

The mandapa (or pavilion) is ‘ usually a rectangular building, 
containing a statue of Buddha. In the Vat Si Jum at Sukhodaya, 
it measured 57 feet wide by 70 feet deep, and sheltered an immense 
statue of Buddha, nearly 50 feet high, which was constructed in 
brick, coated with stucco and gilded. The walls of the mandapa 
were also built in brick, and they carried a lofty roof or tower of the 
same material; at a height of 32 feet from the ground the brick 
courses commenced to project one in front of the other, till they met 
at the top, thus forming in section an inverted pyramid.” 

Smaller pavilions were built ‘to hold the Buddha-pada, the 
mythical representation of the sacred feet of Buddha.”® 


1 Fergusson, loc. cit., Vol. II, pp. 406, 407, 408. 


2 Tbid, Vol. II, p. 408. 


% Locally known as Phrabat, wheel of the Law, the most famous example in 
Siam being 12 miles from Lophaburi. 


326 


INDIA AND ABROAD SIAM 


The other types of buildings are the Belfry (Ho’ Rakhang) and the 
sacred Library (Ho’ Trai), the latter found only in the royal temples. 
The sacred tank in the enclosures was known as Sa, equivalent to 
the Cambodian Sra and the Indian Saras. 

5 The principal phra differs slightly in design (from those already 
described), the upper part being partly chedi and partly prang. 
It is raised on a platform and surrounded by eight smaller towers, 
consisting of a lower storey, with niche on each side containing a 
statue of Buddha, with a superstructure recalling the entrance door- 
ways of Cambodia and Java, though the sculpture is very inferior. 
Above the architrave, carried by rectangular piers with moulded 
capitals, is a pediment enclosed with richly carved moulding, with 
dragons’ heads on each side, and in the tympanum, which forms 
a niche, is a figure of Buddha in the mirodpa posture, with other 
figures. Above, there is a second storey with a repetition of the 
pediment and niche to a smaller scale, and there may have been a 
third storey, rising about 25 feet in height, the great phra in the 
centre being 80 to go feet high. Three towers of a similar kind, 
placed side by side, exist in the Vat Sisavai, also at Sukhodaya 
where they take the place of the phra. Above a plain ground 
storey, with three angle projections, are other storeys, of which 
six still exist in the western tower on the right, and on each face 
is a niche with trefoil head and naga terminations enclosing a 
statue, and, on the angle projections, antefixae carved with heads 
of garudas and other deities. The upper storeys are only slightly 
set back, one behind the other, so that they may be the prototypes 

rang.’* : 
ee of see structures many examples would be found in 
the same enclosure. Thus in the Vat Jai at Sukhodaya, the most 
important temple illustrated by Fournereau, there was one great 
phra-chedi and its annexes, two bots, six vihdns, three kamburiens, 
one mandapa, ten small pavilions, five phra-prang, and ONGr ca: 
hundred phra-chedi, most of these being erected by private persons 
as funeral monuments and memorials—altogether nearly two 
22 
Her ke design of the phre-prang is found in the crowning members 
of the (modern) pagodas of Bangkok. But their elaboration o 


1 Fergusson, Joc. cit., Vol. II, p. 409- Plate XLVII. 
4 [hid., Vol. II, pp- 408-409. 
327 


INDIAN ARCHIPELAGO HINDU ARCHITECTURE jy 


detail and exuberance of coloured ornament’ is disapproved by 
Fergusson, and stated to have been ‘here carried to an extent truly 
barbarous.’ But they show ‘the innate and irrepressible love 
of architecture they display.’ Fergusson comments, however, jn 
strong terms when he says, ‘ but it also shows how easily these higher 
aspirations degenerate into something very like vulgarity, when 
exercised by a people in so low a stage of civilization as the modern 
Siamese.’ 

‘The same remarks apply to their civic buildings : palaces and 
porticos, and even dwelling-houses, are all as rich as carving and 
gilding and painting can make them ; but, as in the pagodas, it is 
overdone and fails to please, because it verges on vulgarity.’ Being 
in despair of the future even, Fergusson concludes that ‘the new 
civilization is not indigenous, but an importation. The men of pro- 
gress wear hats, the ladies French gowns, and they build palaces 
with Corinthian porticos and sash-windows.’ He truly deplores 
the similar state of affairs in India when he says, ‘it is the sort of 
civilization that is found in the bazar in Calcutta, and it is not 
desirable, in an architectural point of view, at all events, if, indeed, 
it is so in any other respect.’? 

The pagodas generally built on the banks of ruins are, however, 
‘like so many monastic towns in the middle of nice gardens with 
shrines dedicated to Lord Buddha. There are preaching halls and 
temporary accommodation for pilgrims and houses for monks.” 

The country of Siam appears to have been markedly connected 
with India from the time of king Asoka. The religions, tradition, 
culture, and population are of Indian extract. Some 98 per cent. of 
Siamese at present profess Buddhism. Before the time of Asoka, 
there are reasons to believe, Hinduism was prevalent there. The 
images of Vishnu, GaneSa, and other deities, and of Rama, Sita, 
as well as the incidents of the Ramdyana and the Mahabharata 
are found depicted in temples and monasteries in Siam. The names 
of places like Ayodhya, Saurashtra, Maharastra, Vishnu-loka, etc., 
as also of persons, are Indian in origin. The name of the country 
itself sounds like Indian. 

Of architecture and sculpture there are numerous examples, as in- 
dicated above, to show that India contributed the leading principles. 

1 Fergusson, loc. cit., Vol. I, pp. 412, 413. 

2 Bose, loc. cit., p. 102. 


328 


Tur Great 7 


roweR oF PAGODA WATCHING AT BANGKOK 


PLATE XLIX 


wks 


A PAGAN PAGODA TOGETHER 


WITH A MONASTERY SHOWING THE HINDU SIKHARA. INseT :—HInDU SIKHARA IN A SIAMESE TEMPLE 


Page 329 


INDIA AND ABROAD CHAMPA 


‘The ‘story of the Ramayana is illustrated on the walls of the 
royal temple at Bangkok.’ The stories of Jatakas were sculptured 
in Sukhodaya. Thus in religion, in literature, in art, in sculp- 
ture, in architecture Siam owes a lot to India. There are kings 
with Indian titles, ministers and officers bearing Indian names, and 
Indian customs and ceremonies practised in Siamese families. 

The Brahmans are stated to have still maintained a leading position 
in the royal court of Siam. ‘They preside over coronation and 
other important ceremonies, and occupy as honourable a position 
as the Buddhist monks in the royal court. They compose the names 
of the princes, towns, and temples in Sanskrit. They also act as 
Hora, or astrologers, and Achar (i.e. Acharya, preceptor) of 
pagodas.” 


CHAMPA 


Champa is the eastern portion of the Indo-Chinese peninsula in 
continuation of Burma, comprising Siam, Laos, Annam, Cambodia, 
and Cochin-China. It corresponds with Annam. It is bounded by the 
Sea of China on the east, and on the west there is a range of hills 
along the valley of Me-kong river, on the south is French Cochin- 
China, and on the north lie the parts of the sea, Laos, and Siam. 
It is about 160 miles from east to west up to the Me-kong. 

The original inhabitants, who were conquered by the Indians, prob- 
ably in the second century 4-D., belonged to the Austronesian race. 

The earliest mention of Champi-deSa is in that passage of the 
Ramayana where it is stated that king Sugriva sent out emissaries 
in search of Sita, stolen by Ravana. The king Asoka’s messengers 
also may have visited the country of Champa. According to the 
Arakanese traditions, the first king of Champa was the son of a ine 
of Benares, who settled at Ramavati, the present Rambyi or Ramri. 
According to another tradition, the first Indian kings of Champa 
were known as the Kaundinya of the lunar race. 

Mainly on the basis of the Vo-chanh inscription in Sanskrit of the 


second or third century of the Christian era, it is clear that Champa 


i i i Siam in E. R. E. 
1 Bose (loc. cit., p. 10g) refers, as his authority, to 
a oe History of Burma, p- 7 quoted by Dr. R. G. Majumdar, Ancient 
: > Lf ) 
Colonies in the Far East, Vol. I, ‘ Champa,’ ‘ Introduction,’ p. XViil. 


329 


INDIAN ARCHIPELAGO HINDU ARCHITECTURE 7 y 


had already been under a ‘ Hindu or Hinduized dynasty.’ Dy. 
R. C. Majumdar takes Sri Mara as the first historical Hindy king 
of Champa. In support of this, Majumdar refers to Ptolemy’s list of 
Sanskrit names in Indo-China, the mention of the Chams o, 
Annamese in history in the second century A.D., and also the Chinese 
reference to the foundation of the kingdom of Champa in 192 ap. 
by Lien of the family of Kiu.1 

Mainly on the basis of inscriptions and Chinese records, Majumdar 
has drawn up the lists of kings of the Hindu dynasties that ruled in 
Champa, beginning with Sri-Mara, from the second century a.p, to 
A.D. 1180.7 

So far as the architectural remains of Champa are concerned, 
they can hardly put up any claim to a comparison with those of 
Cambodia or Java in respect of purely technical design or artistic 
decorations. But the temples of Champa appear to have been 
erected earlier than those of Angkor Vat and Boro-Budur. mr 

The Cham temples have been found in groups at Myson, Dong 
Duong, Po-Nagar, and Pho Hai areas, and individually at Binh 
Lam, Khuong My, and Bang An. 

M. Parmentier has made a technical classification of all these 
monuments under five headings. What he calls the ‘ primitive 
art’ is represented by the Myson and the Po Nagar temples of the 
seventh and the first quarter of the ninth centuries respectively. 
The ‘ cubic art,’ deriving its name from the cube-shaped roof of the 
temples, is represented by the Myson temples of the eighth century, 
Po Nagar temple of the late ninth century, and the Dong Duong 
temple of the same period. The ‘ mixed art,’ deriving its title from 
a combination of ‘primitive’ proportions and ‘cubic’ roof, is 
represented by the Dong Duong temple of the late ninth century. 


1 Majumdar : ‘ Champa,’ Introduction, pp. xx—xxiv. 
2 Dynasty of Sri Mara of Sixteen Kings from 250-529. 

Dynasty of Gangaraja of Fourteen Kings from 500-757. 

Dynasty of Panduranga of Five Kings from 758-860. 

Dynasty of Bhrigu of Seven Kings from 861-972. 

Dynasty of Some Varman of Nine Kings from 972-1044. 

Dynasty of Some Varman of Three Kings from 1050-1069. 

Dynasty of Some Varman of Four Kings from 1070-1126. 

Dynasty of Some Varman of Five Kings trom 1139-1180. 

: — Champa ’, Chap. IJI-X, pp. 19-195: 
8M. H. Parmentier, Inventaire Descriptif des Nthatnie Chams iE L’ Annam, 
Vol. II, pp. 19 et. seq. quoted by Majumdar, ‘ Champa,’ Chap. X, p. 258. 


330 


PLATE LI 


Page 330 


CHAM PILLAR, ELABORATELY CARVED 


PLATE LII 


9 PORE ews en ee. 


Square Cuam PILLar 


INDIA AND ABROAD CHAMPA 


oe ales sic art’ is so called because of the architectural formula 
followed in the representation of the Myson temple of mid-eleventh 
ae me “pyramidal art’ dervies its title from its pyramidal 
? presented by the Bang An temple of the earliest tenth 
fn Coe ce ee 
; : ' nth century. Lastly, what is called the 
derived art,’ has departed from the recognized canons of the 
classical art and is represented by the Myson temples of the twelfth 
century, the Po Khaun Garai of the fourteenth century, and Po 
Rome of the mid-seventeenth century. 

The Myson temples are situated in a valley, measuring about a 
mile in extent, south-east of Touranne. They are built in the valley 
proper, as also upon the low peaks of the neighbouring hills. They 
may be divided into some ten groups. The first group consists of the 
main shrine and three subsidiary temples on each side, of the same 
form but smaller in size, all built on one terrace in a quadrangular 
courtyard, surrounded by brick walls. They are cruciform (svastika) 
in plan and consist of several stages or storeys. ‘ In the first stage 
of the pyramidal roof, each side contains three pilasters. The second 
and third stages are repetitions of the first, though on a smaller scale.’ 
The second group, within a square wall, contains the principal temple 
in the centre of the enclosure. ‘A hall with double doors gives 
access to the court from the east. Two subsidiary temples occupy 
respectively the south-eastern and north-eastern angle. There are 
two other temples within the enclosure, in the south-west angle and 
in front of it. There are besides, seven miniature temples attached to 
the enclosing wall.’ One of these temples ‘ has only two storeys 
and the roof of the upper one is ridge-shaped, with ogival ends.’ 
There is a colonnade in front of the main shrine. The octagonal shaft 
of each column ‘ is fluted and ornamented at both ends. The base 
and capital are both executed with rare perfection. The abacus is 
decorated with the busts of four figures brandishing swords of a 
peculiar kind. The topmost member is a beautiful lotus. 

The third group is also enclosed with a wall. It consists of the main 
shrine, five other edifices, three temples, two subsidiary temples, 
all of the same orientation, and one gate tower. The main piciae 
separated by an open space into the sanctuary and the ae e. 
‘ Internally the arched vault is not of a regular pyramidal character, 
but rises straight to a certain distance. 


33h 


INDIAN ARCHIPELAGO HINDU ARCHITECTURE ty 


The fourth group is ‘ enclosed by a continuous wall which forms 
a circuit round the northern, southern, and western walls.’ There 
are two principal temples separated by a common court, two other 
subsidiary temples, two minor buildings, and another temple within 
the same enclosure. The fifth group is also enclosed by a wall, with 
a gateway in the middle of the southern wall. The main shrine had 
a tiled roof. Its ‘inner chamber is square in plan, and has four 
wooden columns at the four angles. It opens by a doorway to the 
west, and has in the centre a richly sculptured pedestal carrying an 
enormous liga’ (phallus of Siva). There are three subsidiary 
temples, two edifices, and remains of several other buildings. In 
this-group only one temple faces the east, the others having their 
facade towards the west. 

The sixth group is also similar in plan, being enclosed by a wall 
with a single gateway. Here there is only one subsidiary temple, to 
the south of the main shrine in the centre of the enclosure. 

The seventh group is similarly enclosed with a single gateway. 
In front of the main shrine, facing west, there is the usual hall (mukha- 
mandapa). There is no subsidiary temple within the enclosure, but 
there appeats to have been a residential chamber. Outside the 
enclosure, to the north-east, there is a temple with four entrances 
on the four sides. 

The eighth group has no other building besides the main shrine, 
facing east, which is furnished with the usual front hall within the 
enclosing wall. There is also no gate-tower, which is substituted by 
a simple doorway. 

The ninth group is also enclosed and has a gateway, but the main 
shrine and other temples have all disappeared. 

The tenth group, at the middle height of a small peak overlooking 
the second, third, and fourth groups, ‘consists merely of a long 
chamber.’ It has two doorways at the two ends.1 

The deities installed in the Myson temples include, besides the 
phallus of Siva, Ganeéa, Skanda, Brahma, Sirya, Indra, and other 
gods and goddesses. 

Dong Duong Group 

The general plan of the Dong Duong temples appears to illustrate 

the design described in the Manasdra and other Silpa-Sastras. The 


1 For further details, vide Majumdar, loc. cit., Vol. I, pp. 240-248 ; Parmentier; 
loc. cit. Plates LXVII—XCVII. 


332 


PLATE LIIE 


CHam TEMPLE oF Duy Huyem 


PLATE LIV 


ANKCR VAT Page 333. 


INDIA AND ABROAD CHAMPA 


whole compound is divided into four main courts. The outermost 
court, like all the rest, had an entrance porch on the east, preceded 
by two columns. Buildings in all the courts are mostly in ruins. In 
the third court there is a single hall with two side entrances. The 
second court contains a long chamber. In the first, or innermost 
court, is situated the main shrine of cross shape (i.e. svastika in plan) 
surrounded by four sanctuaries. There is, in front, an imposing build- 
ing (mukha-mandapa) with four bays. There are also two other 
temples and two residential blocks. The whole court is enclosed by 
a wall, with a porch on the east. 

From the inscriptions it appears that ‘the ruins at Dong Duong 
are those of a Buddhist temple and monastery, built by king Jaya- 
varman in A.D. 875,’ and that ‘the temple was situated within the 
town of Indrapura, which was at that time the capital of Champa, 
and that the widowed queen of Indravarman, named Haradevi 
Rajakula, installed many gods and goddesses within the temple 
area. The actual discovery of Buddhist images among the ruins 
of the temple also demonstrate the Buddhist character of the 
building.” 


Po Nagar Group 


The Po Nagar temple, otherwise known as ‘ the goddess of the city,’ 
is situated, facing east, on a small hillock at the entrance of a valley. 
‘ It commands a good view of the lagune at the foot of the hillock 
and of the sea close by.’ 

"The temples were built within an enclosing wall in two rows from 
north to south, each containing three. The principal temple is in the 
front row. ‘A steep staircase leads to a lower terrace contaiming an 
imposing hall with a colonnade.’ There appears to have been a 

also. 
othe Ayperttagicnie of the main temple, wherein is installed a beauti- 
ful image of Uma, ‘ consists of a small member of ah apie 
superimposed upon a bigger one of the same shape. Each 7 these 
stands upon two pilasters, between which, at the bottom, is a ee 
figure decorated with a mukuta (crown) and with hands joine oa 
the breast.’ ‘ The roof consists of four stages. The wie ee e 
roof is a pyramidal vault, ending in a long chimney to which are 

1 Majumdar, loc. cit., Vol. I, p. 2593 vide Parmentier, Plates XCVIII, et seq. 


333 


INDIAN ARCHIPELAGO HINDU ARCHI TECTURE | Wr 


attached, at the height of the third stage of the roof, two CrOss-pipes 
which extend over the entire summit of the building. The Vestibule 
is a copy of the main building in all its essential features,”1 

This appears to be the best preserved and most beautiful of all 
temples in Champa. 

One other temple of this group has a peculiar roof, consisting of 
a single curvilinear pyramidal dome of elegant shape, with two bulb- 
shaped stones as finials looking like the phallus of Siva. 

From inscriptions it is clear that there were several other buildings 
at Po Nagar. One of these has been identified as an apsidal Buddhist 
chaitya, with a central nave and two aisles.? In another inscription 
it is stated that ‘ King Satyavarma built a new temple and installed 
therein a new mukha-linga, together with images of other gods and 
goddesses.’ In a third inscription of A.D. 817, Senapati Par is stated 
to have ‘ erected three temples with mandapas (pavilions) and gates 
and installed gods and goddesses.”® 

The Po Hai temples* on the top of a hillock consist of three shrines, 
facing east, in two different levels. The principal one is enclosed 
by a wall. ‘The absence of corner towers brings out very promi- 
nently the resemblance of this type of temples with the storeyed stapas 
of India, from which it seems to have been ultimately derived.’® 

The Po Dam group consists of six temples,® also situated on a hill, 
but face the south, and the upper storeys of one with curved roof 
resemble some small temple in Boro-Budur. 

The Po Rome temples consist of the principal shrine and another 
building.” 

The Po Klong Garai temple comprises six buildings, built on a 
peak, commanding a fine view.® 

The Ho Lai temples consist of three shrines built on a plain, and 
the Hung Thank group of five temples at the foot of a hill. 


* Majumdar, loc. cit., Vol. I, pp. 252, 251 ; Parmentier, loc. cit., Plate XXLI. 

* Parmentier, Plate XXI, Vol. I, Pp. 127, quoted by Majumdar. : 

8 For further details, vide Majumdar, loc. cit., Vol. I, p. 258: for inscriptions, 
Book III, pp. 41-218. 

‘Parmentier, Joc. cit., Parts I to III, PP- 29 ¢é seq. 

5 Majumdar, loc. cit., Vol. I, Pp. 254. 

6 Parmentier, Plates VI and VII; Majumdar, p. 255. 

7 Parmentier, Plates VIII to X; Majumdar, p. 255. 

8 Parmentier, Plates XI to XIV; Majumdar, p. 255. 

® Parmentier, Plates XV to XIX; Majumdar, p. 256; and Parmentier, Plates 
XX and XXI : Majumdar, p. 256. 


334 


Po-KLANG-GARAI 


PLATE LV 


Page 334 


PLATE LVI 


Page 335 


Po-KLANG-GaRAl (ANOTHER VIEW) 


INDIA AND ABROAD 


CHAMPA 


The remains of a few cave temples also have been found at 
several places in Champa. The Phu Duoc cave is oval in shape. 
‘ The inner chamber has a vaulted roof, and two cells radiate from 
it. ‘The marble mountains near Hos Que contain several caves 
round a central hall, which is, however, open to the sky.’ ‘ The 
caves of Phong Nha are of massive proportions.’ This cave contains 
an image of Buddha and some: other sculptures. There are some 
hundred inscriptions, one of which appears to contain the word 
‘ Sariputra,’ thus indicating a Buddhistic sanctuary. The Chua Hang 
cave also contains a small image of Buddha. The caves near the Lac- 
Son village appear to have been ‘ transformed into Buddhist sanc- 
tuaries by the Chams.’ In these caves there are some thirty-six 
inscriptions. ry Stee 

The sculptures in connexion with the temples and caves com- 
prise the images of both gods and goddesses, kings and queens, men 
and women, and animals. The actual iconographic proportions 
in Tala or any other system are not available. But Dr. Majumdar 
declares that ‘ the features, at least’ of the upper part of the body, 
are well proportioned and the expression of face is pleasing.’ But 
he comments that, ‘like the Indian art, the images of gods in later 
periods became more and more deformed, till they assumed some- 
times a monstrous appearance.’ The figures of ‘dodrapalas (door- 
keepers) in temples are cited as examples.? Some of the human 
figures, comprising praying ones, mounted on. elephants, lions, 
apsaras (nymphs), demons, etc., as also of musicians,.are stated to be 
‘really charming.’ The bas-reliefs. on persia are stated to be 
so good as to be compared with those of Java. - 

. City Plan pet 

The description of the city of Champa is available from a muearet 
text.8 It is stated to have been situated at.a distance of about 64 
miles from the sea’ coast. «At the north-west angle of the pace 
of the city were high mountains and a long chain of hills. oe e 
north of these hills flowed a river, to the south also there was another 
river which joined the former to the east of the city. 

1 Majumdar, loc. cit., Vol. I, pp. 259-260 ; Parmentier, loc. cit., Vol. I, pp. 218, 


i ; | 542-548, quoted by Majumdar. ; 
By ee atten hon DE ear ‘Champa,’ pp. 263-2715 and Parmentier, 


He, a Oe rated Cd 527) referred to by Dr. Majumdar, loc. cit., p. 19: 
soo 


INDIAN ARCHIPELAGO HINDU ARCHI TECTURE IN 


‘The city was surrounded by a wall about a mile and a hal¢ i 
circumference. On a brick wall, about: 200 feet high, was raise 4 ‘ 
second brick wall of half that height, pierced by square loop-holes 
On the walls were placed wooden boards supporting many-storeyed 
pavilions, on the roof of which again arose towers varying in height 
from 40 to 70 feet. There were four gates in the walls. The main 
gate was on the east. It opened near two islands in the river Houaj. 
The western gate opened on a double ditch which turned to the north 
and reached a hill. The southern gate, likewise, opened on a double 
ditch. The northern gate opened on the river Houai.’ 

‘ Within the walls were a small enclosure, the assembly rooms, and 
brick palaces. There was a palace, opening to the east, of which 
the loose pieces supporting the rafter looked like the tail of an owl,’ 
The towers are also stated to have been of an owl shape, ‘ with its 
tail turned towards the wind and touching the mountains and the 
clouds, looking as if towards the water and ascending to the highest 
peak of the mountains.”! In design, the city itself, it should be 
noticed, may correspond to the Kheta plan of the Mdnasdra, while 
pechaka (owl) has been distinctly referred to in the Mdnasdra as 
a site-plan, which appears to have been carried to the towers and 
palaces built within the city, probably of the same plan.” 

There are also scanty remains of some fortified cities. The citadel 
of Sri Banoy, an irregular quadrangle in shape, is situated on the 
right bank of the river Song Luy. This ‘ shows greater knowledge 
in the art of fortification than any other.’? Thank Ho, about ten miles 
from the mouth of the river Song Da Rang, is ‘ enclosed between 
a mountain and the left side of the river, and the open face is pro- 
tected by a wall. It was also protected by reduits and towers and 
had several gates.’ Of the citadel of Chausa and Coy Luy very 
little remains to enable a description. 

Remains of ‘a first class military fortification’ have been dis- 
covered at Caban, the ancient capital town of Vijaya. ‘ They cover 
a rectangular area of over 1,500 yards from north to south and of 
1,200 yards from east to west. It was protected by an arm of the 
Binb Dinh river on the north, and a strong wall, without any flanking, 
on either sides. The wall was built of earth with revetment of 

1M, Auroussean, B. E. F., Vol. XIV, no. 9, pp. 23-34. Dr. Majumdar, loc. cit. 


Vol. I, pp. 19-20. 
* Vide Manasara, Chap. VII ; and see pp. 101-102, 104 of this volume. 


336 


INDIA AND ABROAD CHAMPA 


limonite, and was pierced through by tunnels for the ingress and 
egress of a small brook. There are a number of high mounds on all 
sides which probably conceal some towers or gates.” 

This brief account of Champa architecture does not lack in the 
variety of structures. Except private dwelling-houses of simple char- 
acter, all other types of buildings, namely, cities, forts, palaces, and 
temples have been referred to. In most cases their Indian origin is 
more than indicated. But there has been difference of opinion on 
this point, on account of the inaccessability of the Silpa-Sastra, like 
the Manasara, wherein alone one can find the basic principles of Hindu 
architecture. Thus M. Parmentier, who has discussed the question 
of the Champa art at great length and who possesses a thorough 
knowledge of the art and architecture of Champa, was faced with a 
real difficulty. In order to come to the conclusion that Champa 
might have borrowed from India through the Indian colonizers, it 
was naturally necessary for Parmentier to see such structures in 
India of some earlier dates than those of Champa. On this ground 
he is perfectly justified in denying a connexion of the Champa art 
with that of Cambodia and Java. So far as India is concerned, 
even in the absence of archaeological remains, there are convincing 
literary evidences which clearly show that Champa art might have 
easily migrated from India. 

Even on purely archaeological grounds, Dr. Majumdar and others 
have joined issue with M. Parmentier when the latter says that, 
‘ with the exception of the curved roof, no typical element of Indian 
architecture appears in Cham style, nor is any typical motif of the 
Cham art traceable in the old Indian style.’ — 

By way of refuting M. Parmentier, Dr. Majumdar rightly says 
that, ‘to us, the characteristic feature of a Cham temple seems to 
be its storied roof of several stages, in gradually diminishing propor- 
tions, each of which is again a miniature of the whole. Now this is 
the characteristic feature of what is known as the Dravidian style, 
The rathas of Mamallapuram and temples of Cenjeeveram and 
Badami of the seventh century A.D. are cited as examples. The essen- 
tial resemblance between the Sikharas of normal Cham temples and 
of the Dharmaraja Ratha and Arjuna Ratha is also referred to. The 
elongated curved roof with ogival ends has its counterpart in 


1 Majumdar, loc. cit., Vol. I, p. 261-262. Parmentier, loc. cit., Plates 1V, XXVII, 
XLIX, LV. e 


337 


INDIAN ARCHIPELAGO HINDU ARCHITECTURE ry 


Ganega Ratha and Sahadeva Ratha. The third type of curved roof 
of Champa temples ‘resembles Draupadi’s Ratha, and is probably 
derived from those of North-Indian style, as Parmentier himself 
admits.’ It is, however, clear and natural that the Chams did not 
blindly imitate the Indian prototypes, but added new elements of 
their own. ‘ But the fact,’ concludes Dr. Majumdar, ‘ that their 
style was throughout based upon the essential and characteristic 
features of Indian style seems to be beyond question.” Dr. Majumdar 
is equally convinced that Cham sculptures bear striking ‘ agreement 
with the Indian style in both essential and non-essential elements,”! 


CAMBODIA 


Cambodia is situated to the south of Siam. It is included in a 
group of countries, without natural boundaries, comprising Burma, 
Siam, Annam, and Cochin-China. The ruined cities, palaces, and 
temples of Cambodia are astonishing from an architectural point 
of view. The famous temple of Angkor Vat and others are in a 
way more imposing than even the Boro-Budur of Java. The Hindu 
city-plan, which is missing in other parts of Insulindia, is fortun- 
ately available in Cambodia. The civil architecture, also, is a novelty 
of the archaeological remains without which the Hindu influence 
in arts and architecture in Insulindia cannot be complete. 

There is a well-established tradition, which has been recognized 
by European authorities” also, that in 443 B.c., Preathong, a Hindu 
prince, son of the king of Indraprastha (the modern Delhi), 
emigrated with a large number of his followers and settled at 
Choukan, north of Angar. ‘ In 125 B.C. the Chinese are said to 
have conquered the Cambodians. There is also a record that, in the 
first centuries of the Christian era, emigrants from Madras made 
their way into Cambodia, introducing the Brahman faith, the 
Sanskrit alphabet, and Indian rites and customs.”® 

The Khmer and Sanskrit epigraphic texts give details of a dynasty 
of seven kings who reigned from A.D. 435 to 680. From the death 
of the last king Jayavarman to the commencement of the -ninth 


century there are no records. In a.D. 802, Jayavarman ©» 
1 Majumdar, loc. cit., Vol. I, pp. 272-274- ; 
2 Dr. Bastian (Vol. I, p. 393) : oe tian 17), quoted by Fergusson, History of 
Indian and Eastern Architecture, Vol. II, p. 373: 
8 Fergusson, loc. cit., Vol. II, p. 373- 


338 


INDIA AND ABROAD 
CAMBODIA 


may have been connected wi : 

dynasty of eighteen cee ae ve dynasty, formed a new 
monarch is attributed the foundatio ae cer aon Mo. tts 
with its capital Angkor Thom. He is crete os Cambodian kingdom, 
tions of the great city of Angk see’ to have laid the founda- 

, gkor Thom, the royal palace in i 

centre, the pyramid temples of Phiméanak yal palace in its 
Bayon, and other structures. Ayman ea uemiepes 
origin to this great kin as correctly traced the 

2 ; g g of the colossal constructions whi 
prea on a four centuries following.? He is also of Meee ie 

1s king may have come from i . : S 

great temple of Boro-Budur. oes cone ate eer 
of comparatively small importance, built towards the aden 
or commencement of the seventh century, in which the o 7 a, 
the Cambodian style may be traced. There are, however. Berane 
similarities between the great temples of Java ard Cambodia The 
other kings of this long dynasty were also great builders Thus f “ 
third king, Indravarman, besides building the temples af Baku es 
Bakong, completed and consecrated the temple of Bayon in Angk 
Thom. To the fourth ki i hate 
| ourth king, YaSovarman, is attributed the comple- 
tion of the great capital city, also the temple of Lolei and the pyramid 
temple of Phiméanakas in the centre of the palace enclosures. The 
ninth king, Rajendravarman, built two great temples, Ta-Prom 
being Brahmanical, and Banteai Kedei, Buddhist. The tenth king 
also built several temples, of which the most important is the pyramid 
temple of Bapoun, immediately south of the royal palace in Angkor 
Thom. The eleventh king, Siryavarman, who reigned for nearly 
a half century, was a great builder, the temples of Phnom Chisor, 
Vat Ek, Phnom Baset, Prah Vihear, and Prah Khan being attributed 
to him, His successor continued his work and built the temples 
of Banteai Ta Kean, Phimai, Pre Rup, and, probably, the temple 
on Mount Bakheng, south of Angkor Thom. Vat Phu may have 
been built in 1090-1100 by one of the three following kings. 

The sixteenth king, Siryavarman II, who ruled from 1112 to 1152, 
the great temple of Angkor Vat, which is said to have 
been laid by his predecessor. No further temples were built during 
the reign of the last two sovereigns.® Thus the actual building period 
in Cambodia may be placed between A.D. 802 and 1152. 

2&, Aymonier, Cambodge, III, p. 468. 


completed 


1 Fergusson, Vol., II, pp. 373-374 
8 Fergusson, Joc. cit., Vol. I, pp. 374-375: 


339 


INDIAN ARCHIPELAGO HINDU ARCHITECTURE Iy 


From an architectural point of view the great temples of Cambodia 
have been divided into four groups.* Those of Ta Prohm, Kedei 
and Pre Rup, possessing generally three enclosures, are built more 
or less on the same level. Secondly, the pyramid temples, as Phimea- 
nakas and Bapuon, consist of a series of narrow terraces rising one 
above the other. Those of Angkor Vat and Bayon combine both the 
enclosed and raised terrace types, where the enclosures are within 
the other, each raised from 15 to 20 feet above the level of that 
outside, making the whole look like a pyramid. The fourth group 
comprises all smaller temples, consisting of three to five sanctuaries 
placed side by side, the centre one being the most important, and 
the whole surrounded by a wall or moat. 

‘ The enclosures consist of a moat or stone wall. In some temples 
one or more of the enclosures take the form of a gallery or corridor, 
which is roofed over with horizontal courses of stone corbelled over 
till they meet at the top. In parts of the enclosures, as also in front of 
temples, are tanks of water with stone borders and steps round. 
Each enclosure is furnished with four gopuras or gateways ended 
with a tower raised from the centre of the top. The gateways on 
the north and south are invariably closed with imitation doors in 
stone. The principal entrance to the temples is, as a rule, from the 
east, except in cases like Angkor Vat, which has a western entrance, 
the capital, Angkor Thom, being on the west.’ 

The remarkable feature of the pyramidal and raised-terrace group 
is their imposing approach by causeways of considerable length and 
their staircases, comprising 392 steps in front of the gopura of Phnom 
Chisor temple. 

‘The sanctuary is always situated on the axis of the principal entrance, 
generally on the east. In general design it takes the form of sikhara or 
tower, the lower portion rarely higher than the width, but crowne 
with a series of receding stages. On the three sides are false door- 
ways, like on the north and south of the gopura, which are elaborately 
carved. The walls are of great thickness, sometimes 5 to 6 feet, deeme 
necessary to carry the superstructure, built with horizontal courses 
of stone or brick, corbelled out internally so as to meet in the centre. 

Tt is hardly necessary to say that all these are the common usual 
features of Hindu architecture applied with little alteration to Cam 
bodian temples. 


1 Fergusson, Joc. cit, Vol. I, pp. 376-380. 
Sao 


INDIA AND ABROAD 
CAMBODIA 


The largest temples i 

ples in Cambodi = 
andere ene” pene ae those of Angkor Vat, Bayon, 
Bayon and Mealea were built at a = nee Placa 
style of Cambodia had reached perth a oan ci eeeateea) 

‘ Angkor Vat ’ means ‘ the t Perhaps its highest development.”t 
a mile to the south of the ace ae Pentel cto 
it and the lake Tonlé Sap.” ‘It is ieee Bho Epos a ata 
sures nearly an English mile each tied eee 
temple measures 1,080 by 1,100 nh tee walled, eae grout 

i 2 2 ards, an 

216 yards wide. The moat is crossed on the pee Sod 
way, carried on piers on either side. This leads to the ae Gane 
five storeys in height, not unlike the gopura of a Dravidi : fe 
but extended by | eee 

uded by ateral galleries and towers to a facade more than 
600 feet in extent. Within this a second raised causeway, 370 yards 
long, leads to a cruciform platform in front of the fecple: On either 
side of this, about half way down, is a detached temple. . . . The 
general plan of the temple . . . consists of three enclosures, one within 
the other, each raised from 15 to 20 feet above the level of that 
outside it, so as to give the whole a pyramidal form. The outer 
enclosure measures 590 feet by 700 feet, and it covers, therefore, about 
413,000 square feet. . .. There are three portals, adorned with towers 
on each face, and on either side of these are open galleries or veran- 
dahs, which, with their bas-relief, are probably the most remarkable 
features of this temple.’ 

It looks like a pyramid ‘ more than 600 feet in breadth across its 
shortest width north and south, and rising to 180 feet at the summit 
of the central tower. It is consequently larger and higher than 
Boro-Budur, and surpasses the latter in its ornamentation as well 


as in the delicacy of its carvings.” 
The temple® proper is situated in the centre of the middle court. 


‘Tt measures 200 feet by 213 feet, and is crowned by five towers 


1 Fergusson, Joc. cit., Vol. II, p. 380. 
2 By a treaty, France obtained from Siam, in 1907, the provinces wherein Angkor 


Vat and numerous other temples are situated. 

3 Fergusson, loc. cit., Vol. Il, pp. 380, 382. 

4 Except in the matter of colonnades of the Rameswara temple, both Boro-Budur 
and Angkor Vat are stated by Fergusson to be superior for architectural design and 
sculptural decoration. ; : , 

5 The building which resembles the innermost temple is that at Ranpur in 
Godwar District of the Jodhpur territory. Its dimensions are nearly the same, 
200 feet by 225 feet ; like this, it has five spires similarly disposed and four open 
courts ; and at Ranpur, as here, there are a certain number of snake figures. 

341 


INDIAN ARCHIPELAGO HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


or spires (Sikhara), one on each angle, and one taller than the other 
in the centre, rising to a height of 180 feet. The central tower has 
four cells, one facing the central hall from each side.’! 

The most wonderful features of the colonnades of Angkor Vat 
are the sculptures that adorn their walls. ‘ These are distributed in 
eight compartments, one on each side of the four central groups of 
entrances, measuring each from 250 to 300 feet in length, with 
a height of about 6} feet. Their aggregate length is thus at least 
2,000 feet. The number of men and animals represented extends 
from 18,000 to 20,000. Generally speaking, the reliefs represent battle 
scenes of the most animated description, taken from the Rdmdyana 
or the Mahabharata.’ There are other bas-relief, also, dealing with 
different subjects, ‘one representing heaven, earth, and hell ; one 
representing the second Avatara of Vishnu, the world-supporting 
tortoise, another dealing with the churning of the ocean with the 
great snake Naga.”2 

* The only other temples where sculpture is used in anything like 
the same profusion,’ declares Fergusson ‘ are those at Boro-Budur 
in Java and that at Halebid ’*? in Mysore State. 

“No trace of an arch of any description has ever been found in 
Cambodian architecture,’ and there is no dome at Angkor Vat. 
There are, however, 1,532 pillars in this single building. All these 
piers strikingly resemble the Roman Doric order. 

So far as the identity of the Angkor Vat is concerned, Fergusson 
and others have no doubt that it was originally a Hindu temple, 
probably of Naga-Vasuki, and that it could not be a Buddhist temple. 
The reasons given are convincing. ‘ Though the god is gone, and the 
Buddhists have taken possession of the temple,® every angle of every 
roof is adorned with an image of the seven-headed snake, and there 
are hundreds of them ; every cornice is composed of snake’s heads ; 
every convolution of the roofs, and there are thousands, terminates 

1 Fergusson, loc. cit., Il, pp. 388. 

2 Tbid., II, pp. 385, 386. 

3 Ibid., p. 386. 

4 Similar resemblance of Kashmir pillars with the Grecian Doric order has been 
recognized (Fergusson, Joc. cit., II, p. 389). It has been shown that the five Indian 
orders described in the Silpa-Sastras, Puranas, and Agamas are similar to the five 
Greek-Roman orders in respect of proportion and mouldings (vide the writer’s 
Encyclopaedia of Hindu Architecture, under Stambha). 


°It is in French hands and in possession of the Siamese bowzes, who have 
dedicated it to the worship of Buddha. 


342 


INDIA AND ABROAD CAMBODIA 


in a five- or seven-headed snake. The balustrades are snakes, and 
the ridge of every roof was apparently adorned with gilt dragons.’ 

‘There is one thing more certain than another,’ emphatically 
declares Fergusson, ‘ that Angkor Vat was not originally erected by 
Buddhists or for Buddhist purposes.’ This fact is abundantly proved. 
‘In the first place, there is no sign of dagoba, or of a vihara, 
or of a chaitya hall in the whole building, nor anything that can be 
called a reminiscence of any feature of Buddhist architecture. More 
than this, there is no trace of Buddha, of any scene from his life, or 
from the Jatakas to be found among the sculptures.’ Referring to 
the Buddhist temples at Bharaut, Sanchi, Amaravati, Gandhara, 
and Boro-Budur, Fergusson concludes, most unhesitatingly as- 
serting, that ‘ there is not a trace of Buddhism in any of the bas- 
reliefs yet brought to light from Angkor Vat, nor an integral statue 
of Buddha or of any Buddhist saint about the place.” 

The Siamese, who are now in possession of the temple, have in- 
troduced images of Buddha into the sanctuaries and other places, 
and, ‘ with the usual incuriousness of people of their class, assert 
(in Siamese records) that it was always so. The unfounded 
traditions of Asoka having sent missionaries to Cambodia and of 
A$vaghosha’s having visited the place, as also the account of a Chinese 
traveller,3 who saw the country with Buddhist spectacles, in 1295— 
1297, have lent colour to the Siamese records. 

The temple of Bayon is situated within the city walls of Angkor 
Thom. It was founded by Jayavarman II (a.D. 802-869), the first 
king of the dynasty, and was consecrated by YaSovarman (889-910), 
the fourth king, about A.D. goo. That this long period of a hundred 
years was required for the construction of this great temple may 
be indicated by the fact that it had a double course of sculptural 
corridors, ‘ the aggregate length of which has been calculated to be 
over 36,000 feet, or nearly twice that of Angkor Vat,’ and that, 
while Angkor Vat has nine towers, the temple of Bayon had fifty. 
Unfortunately it suffers from terrible ruin and a forest of trees has 
badly invaded it. Thus no general view is available. But the 
architects have recovered its wonderful plan. It is of a pyramidal 
form and belongs to the third group of Cambodian temple. ‘ The 

1 Fergusson, loc. cit., Vol. II, p. 390-391. 2 Ibid., p. 390. 

3 Translation by Abel Remusat, Nouveaux Melanges Astatlps, Vol. I, pp. 78, 
et, Sq. 


343 


INDIAN ARCHIPELAGO HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


principal difference between it and the Angkor Vat is found in the 
second platform, and the great importance given to the sanctuary, 
as well as the richer and more elaborate ornamentation.’ It had 
great entrance porches on the north, south, and west sides, and 
the entrance porch vestibule and two other halls preceding the 
sanctuary on the east side. 

It appears to have been a Brahma temple from the fact that the 
towers are decorated with the four great masks of Brahma on each 
face. Their ‘ fine modelling and expression,’ declares Fergusson, ‘ are 
only approached by the great Egyptian Sphinx.”* 


Beng Meéalea 


The temple of Beng Méalea, probably of the ninth century, is 
situated about twenty miles east of Angkor Thom. It belongs to the 
first group of Cambodian temples, all the enclosures being more or 
less on the same level. Its exceptional features lie in the fact that, in 
the first enclosure on the south or left side, are two groups of buildings 
‘which are assumed to have been the palaces of the king and the 
queen respectively.’ The palaces are identified by the smaller corridors 
and great halls, with side aisles, as throne or state reception rooms. 
‘ The walls of the corridors are as those of Angkor Vat and Bayon, 
the decoration being confined to the entrance portals and the towers.” 
All the outer courts are filled with water, forming huge tanks. 

This is also in a ruined condition. Its general view is thus not 
available. The plan has been, however, reconstructed.* The chief 
deity of the temple is missing. But it is clear from the general 
history of the dynasty that it was originally a Hindu temple. 


Bapoun 


The temple of Bapoun is an example of the pyramid type of Cam- 
bodian temple. It is situated immediately south of the palace in 
Angkor Thom. ‘ It bears considerable resemblance to the temple of 
Bayon, but the height of its second and third platform is much 
greater. Moreover, the Brahma masks were not carved on the 
twenty-eight towers of Bapoun, nor are the walls of the corridor 
enriched with the bas-relief sculpture of Bayon and Angkor Vat. 


1 Fergusson, loc. cit., II, p. 392. 2 Tbid., II, p. 396. 
3 Vide Fergusson, Plate no. 470; and M. L. Delaporte, Le CGambodge, Tome I, 
Le Royaume Actuel, par Etienne Aymonier. 


344 


INDIA AND ABROAD CAMBODIA 


But the richness in beauty of the carving is quite as fine as that of 
Bayon.”! 

This is also in a ruined condition. Its other details are thus 
missing.” 


City of Angkor Thom 


The foundation of the city of Angkor Thom was laid by the 
first king, Jayavarman II (802-869), but not completed or occupied 
till the reign of YaSovarman (889-910), the fourth king. This long 
period of a hundred years required for its construction is indicated 
by the greatness of the city, its palaces, temples, roads, and bridges. 
‘ The city measured close upon 10,000 feet east to west, and 9,600 
feet from north to south, giving a perimeter of 74 miles to the en- 
closure walls. Those walls, about 22 feet high, were surrounded by 
a moat, 300 feet wide, and entered through five gates, one on the north, 
south, and west sides, and two on the east, the most important, called 
the Gate of Victory, leading to the palace.’® It was of what is called 
the svastika (cruciform) plan in the Manasara and other Silpa-Sastras. 
It consisted of a central gateway, 52 feet square, with recessed 
angles and side wings. Three towers, with Brahma masks on the four 
sides of each, rose above the central gateway and the side wings. 
The walls of the city were also of very great extent and of dimen- 
sions commensurate with its importance. Unfortunately no other 
details of the city proper are available. 

‘ The palace enclesure, situated in the centre of the city, measured 
about 2,000 feet by 800 feet and was surrounded by a double wall, 
with moat between. In front of the palace enclosure was a great 
terrace over 800 feet long by 45 feet wide, and 15 feet high, the walls 
of which were sculptured with elephants. No traces of walls of any 
description have been found in front of this terrace, suggesting that 
it formed an open space where reviews took place before the king 
and his courtiers on the terrace. At the north end of this square is 
a cruciform (svastika) structure, about 30 feet wide and 60 feet 
long, richly decorated, with six bands of sculptured figures, and it 


1 Fergusson, loc. cit., II, p. 398. 

2 The other examples of the pyramidal type are Phiméanakas, Bakheng, and Ta 
Kio, of which also the details are missing. 

3 Fergusson, loc. cit., II, p. 401. 


345 


INDIAN ARCHIPELAGO HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


was on the top of this that the French explorers found the supposed 
statue of the leprous king! to whom the monument was ascribed.”? 

The great temples of Angkor Vat, Bayon, and Bapoun® and many 
smaller temples were built in this capital city. Some of the numerous 
temples appear to have been ‘built as palaces for the king and 
occupied by him, his family, and courtiers.’ ‘In the outer court of 
Beng Méalea are, two groups of structures which have been des- 
cribed as the palaces of the king and the queen respectively. On 
the west side of Phiméanakas, and within the palace enclosure of 
Angkor Thom, are the foundations of buildings which are supposed 
to have been the residences of the king and his family, the women’s 
quarters occupying the whole width of the enclosure against the 
west wall, in which there is no entrance gate. At Vat Phu, near 
Basak, on either side of the causeway leading to the temple, is a 
structure of about 150 feet frontage, with a rectangular court at the 
back and surrounded with a corridor vaulted like those in the tem- 
ples, and those are considered to be palaces. Again at Phnom Chisar, 
on the north:side of the court, the sills of the windows are 6 feet from 
the ground, so that the corridor they lighted may have been occu- 
pied by women.’ Concerning the accommodation necessary for a 
king and his retinue of thousands, Fergusson declares that only tem- 
ples like Angkor Vat, Beng Méalea, Ta Prohm, and Prah Khan 
could possibly hold them. Though Bayon might have been occupied 
by the priests only, the series of magnificent halls in the enclosures 
of Angkor Vat and Beng Méalea ‘ would seem to have been pro- 
vided for the needs of a great court.” 

Some of these great structures might have been used also as col- 
legiate mathas of the Brahmans, with provision for accommodation 
for the numerous students and teachers.’ Fergusson speaks highly 
on the perfection of the ancient roads and bridges. ‘ One great 
trunk road seems to have stretched for 300 miles across the country 
from Korat, in a south-easterly direction, to the Me-kong river. It 
was a raised causeway, paved throughout like a Roman Road, and 


1 King YaSovarman II, the fourth monarch of the dynasty, who is credited with 
the completion of the capital Angkor Thom, of which the foundation was laid by 
the first monarch a hundred years earlier. 

2 Fergusson, loc. cit., Il, pp. 401-402. 

3 For details, vide ibid., Fergusson. 


4 Fergusson, loc. cit., I1, pp. 399-400. 
5 Cf, Lajonquiere Inventaire Descriptif, Tome II, Introduction, p. 29. 


346 


ee) 2 oe 


INDIA AND ABROAD CAMBODIA 


every stream that it crossed was spanned by a bridge, many of which 
remain perfect to the present day.” 

One of these bridges was 400 feet in length and 50 feet in breadth, 
richly ornamented by balustrades and cornices, and representations 
of snakes and the snake-king. ‘ The extraordinary thing is,’ states 
Fergusson, ‘ that it is constructed without radiating arches, but, like 
every structure in the place, by a system of bracketing or horizontal 
arches, and without cement. Yet it has withstood, for five centuries 
at least, the violence of the tropical torrent which it spans.” 

There can be no doubt about the sceintific skill of the architects 
who built the great Cambodian structures, cities, roads, and 
bridges. By way of an illustration, Fergusson refers to their mechanical 
skill employed in constructing the roofs of great structures wholly 
of hewn stone, without the aid either of wood or concrete or cement 
of any kind, and in dovetailing and joining them so beautifully that 
they remain watertight and perfect after at least five centuries of 
neglect in a tropical climate. ‘ When we put all these things toge- 
ther,’ concludes Fergusson, ‘it is difficult to decide whether we 
ought most to admire the mechanical skill which the Cambodian 
architects displayed in construction or the largeness of conception 
and artistic merit which pervades every part of their design.” 

About the Indian origin of the Cambodian art there is no doubt. 
‘ Indian temples were constructed with pillars almost purely classical 
in design, and ornamented with bas-reliefs so strangely Egyptian 
in character.’ In Cambodia before the Hindu colonization there 
might have been a civilization and even some religion, but no art, 
declares Fergusson. ‘ Indians seem slowly, and only to a limited 
extent, to have been able to modify their religion towards Hinduism, 
probably because it was identical, or at least sympathetic, but they 
certainly endowed the Cambodians with an art which we have no 
reason to suppose they before possessed.” 


1 Fergusson, loc. cit., I, pp. 402. 

2 bid, II, pp. 403. 

3 Jt has already been pointed that what Fergusson considered to be the Greco- 
Roman orders are really Indian, fully described in the Silpa-Sastras, Puranas, and 
Agamas. Fergusson, like many early European scholars and historians, was 
obsessed by a prejudice. Whatever scientifically developed things were found in 
India were sought to be explained by the theory of importation instead of the 
natural process of indigenous origin. 

4 Fergusson, loc. cit., II, p. 391. 


347 


INDIAN ARCHIPELAGO HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


SUMATRA 


The great island of Sumatra is nearly four times as large as Java 
and the fifth island of the whole world in area, Greenland, New 
Guinea, Borneo, and Madagascar alone surpassing it. ‘ It lies almost 
equally in the northern and southern hemispheres, north-west of 
Java, and west and south of the Malay Peninsula, its western and 
northern shores being washed by the Indian ocean. It has a length 
of 1,000 miles and a maximum breadth of 230 miles. Of the vast 
area of this enormous island a large part is still unexplored and 
unknown. The interior plateaus, forests, and mountains are still 
the home of cannibal tribes and the haunt of elephants and tigers.’! 

The origin of the name is ascribed by some to an abbreviation of 
the Malay words ‘ burut suma utara,’ used by the people of Java to 
describe the situation of Sumatra to their ‘ north-west.’ According 
to others, the name owes its origin to the Sanskrit form samudra or 
sea, given by the Hindu settlers to imply the ocean island. Yet a 
third derivation is found in Suvarna-dvipa (island of gold), which is 
found mentioned in the Rémdyana in connexion with the search for 
Sita, stolen by Ravana. 

Sumatra as an island of gold is mentioned, besides in the Ramayana, 
in Buddhist literature also. ‘ From Chinese sources we learn that 
a Hinduized kingdom of Palembang (formerly known as Srivijaya) 
existed in Sumatra in the fifth century a.p. In the tenth century this 
kingdom . . . ruled over fifteen subject states. In the tenth century 
this Sumatran kingdom was conquered by Java, but soon recovered 
its independence. Early in the thirteenth century we find again a list 
of the subject countries of Srivijaya. In the fourteenth century it 
came under the sway of Majapapit kingdom of Java.’* Thus ‘ the 
history of the great island before its rediscovery by the Portuguese is 
wrapped in mystery.”4 

‘The archaeological monuments of the Hindu period in Sumatra 
are of small importance compared with those of Java.’ 

A king of the Sailendra dynasty of the kingdom of Srivijaya in Su- 
matra is stated to have built, in Central Java, the temple of Kalasan, 


1A.S. Walcott, Fava and Her Neighbours, pp. 275-276. 
2B. R. Chatterjee, India and Fava, I, pp. 22-28. 

3 Tbid., p. 14. 

4 Walcott, p. 278. 


348 


INDIA AND ABROAD SUMATRA 


of the Mahayana divinity Tara. ‘ These Sumatran monarchs built 
on a grand scale in Java rather than in Sumatra.” Thus, in Sumatra 
itself, no trace of Hindu monuments of religious character were 
found and recorded by the early visitors. Perhaps whatever monu- 
ments may have been there were of perishable materials and were 
easily destroyed by the Moslem invaders. But the existing civil 
architecture of the vast island must have been based upon the old 
tradition. So far as the peculiar horned houses of Sumatra are con- 
cerned, it will be noticed that their foundations on bamboo-pole 
or harder wood have their counterpart in the thatched houses in 

many parts of India. The horn itself may be seen in varying degrees 

in thatched houses in Bengal in particular. Their angularity increases 

in houses of those places where strong and stormy wind blows periodi- 

cally. The interior arrangement and accommodation differ in 

accordance with the local conditions and the varying requirements 

of the occupants. 

The horned houses are mostly dwellings. They are oblong in 
shape, with the front on one of the long sides. ‘ They are one storey 
high and stand several feet above the ground, on posts or piles. 
The walls are of wood or plaited bamboo, the front steps of wood, 
stucco-covered brick, or stone, the windows mere openings closed 
by means of shutters or screens, and the doors plain and usual.’ 
The larger and better types of these houses are furnished with 
elaborate porches at the entrance, and the ends of the main structure 
rise in curves and are highly carved. The roof, of which the peculiarity 
lies in its simplest form, ‘ consists of a flexible ridge-pole running 
lengthwise off the house, supported only at the ends.’ The top line 
is curved with raised ends and represents a crescent.? 

‘ A development of the primitive form is found in the houses with 
wings at the ends, each wing necessitating an additional horn or 
peak in the roof. The horns are covered with metal in best houses.’* 
Facing each dwelling-house there are, as a rule, two small structures 
on high posts, which are used as rice barns or family granaries. ‘ Their 
entrances, for better security from men, rats, and snakes, are high up 


1 Chatterjee (p. 15), on the authority of Prof. Krom, De Sutrantraansche Periode 
der Favansche Geschiedenis, 1922. 

2 In India, in East Bengal in particular, the top line curves in a reverse manner, 
with a raised middle and the ends sloping downwards. 


3 Walcott, Fava and Her Neighbours, pp. 314-315. 
349 


INDIAN ARCHIPELAGO HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


under the gables of their horned roofs, and reached only by the aid 
of ladders.’ 

‘In every (horned) house of the richer and more prosperous, 
the front door opens on an oblong hall or living room, of equal length 
with the middle section of the roof or that between the central 
pair of horns. To the rear are the sleeping rooms and kitchen, and 
when the houses have wings, there are a few steps at each end of 
the main apartment leading to raised sleeping rooms or platforms, 
shut off by curtains. The houses are all raised high above the ground 
on posts, and this lower space is often fenced in with lattice and 
used as a cellar and carriage-house, probably sometimes even as 
a stable, piggery, or chicken house.”! 

‘ There are two other distinctive buildings in every self-respecting 
highland village—the bale or meeting place, and the misigi¢t or 
mosque.’ 

‘ The village graveyards are quite apart from the houses of wor- 
ship and seem to receive little care, their plain, upright tombstones 
being often broken or fallen down.”? 


CELEBES 


The term might have been derived from the Malay words ‘ Si 
Labih ’ (land up there), or ‘ Seli-besi,’ signifying iron kris. ‘ Celebes 
itself is fourth in size of the various islands, surpassed in this respect 
by New Guinea, Borneo, and Sumatra itself. Its length is roughly 
about five hundred miles, and its width is so varying that, while at 
the middle it is a scant twenty miles, at the north end it is over a 
hundred.’ The inhabitants of the interior and the central Celebes, 
known as the head-hunting Toradjas, are still in a savage condition ; 
only those of the Minahasa District in the north, a small area in the 
neighbourhood of Macassar, and a few scattered settlements in near 
proximity to the coasts, are partly modernized. The people of the 
southern end of Celebes are nearly all Macassarese or Bugis, the latter 
being the seamen of the Archipelago, the greatest navigators and 
the most enterpising traders’.® 

‘The houses of the Kampongs vary in many details from those 
in Java. They are generally raised several feet above the ground on 
poles, and have gabled roofs, shuttered windows, and considerable 


1 Walcott, ibid., pp. 324-325. 2 Ibid., pp. 315, 316. 
8 Ibid., pp. 111, 112. 


359 


INDIA AND ABROAD BALI 


ornamentation in the way of carved woodwork. The walls are 
of matting or of neatly plaited bamboo, the roofs are of nipa or 
palm-leaf thatch.”? 

The house of this type is very usual in villages in Bengal, with 
only this much difference that the space between the ground and 
the floor is filled with earth, forming a plinth. 

There are several groups of islands where traces of ancient struc- 
tures may be seen. The Ambonia, or Ambon, group includes Boeroc 
(Bourou), Cerum, the Bandas, the Arus, and many smaller islands 
of the Banda sea coast of Timor.? The Bandas include Banda Lontar, 
‘a crescent-shaped island, six miles long by a half broad; Banda 
Neira, two miles by one in dimension, and Gunong Api (the island 
of Volcano).’* On a steep hill, at the water’s edge, there is a series 
of mediaeval fortifications, very little of which remains to enable 
an architectural description.* 

There are the remains of an imposing old fort at Nassau also. 
‘A moat, now nearly dry, surrounds the walls. . . . This fortifi- 
cation must, in the old days, have been an almost impregnable 
stronghold, for its walls are, at least on the sides towards the sea, 
500 feet long, 20 feet high, and over 15 feet in thickness.’ Like the 
forts at Agra, Delhi, and other places, it is today occupied, laments 
Mr. Walcott, ‘ by peaceful dwellings, gardens, tennis courts, while 
trees and undergrowth have taken the place of cannon on its ram- 
parts.’5 

The Fort Belgica is an ancient structure. It is of pentagonal form 
with high exterior walls. ‘ Like Fort Nassau, Belgica is no longer 


in use for purposes of defence.’® 
BALI 


Bali is separated from Java by a narrow strait. Of all the peoples 
of Insulindia, the Balinese have retained to this day the religion of 
the early Hindu settlers. They call themselves ‘ men of Madjapahit,’ 
and indeed many of them are descendants of subjects of the great 
Hindu kingdom of Eastern Java of that name, who fled across the 


1 Walcott, Java and Her Neighbours, pp. 115-116. 2 [bid., p. 166. 
83 [bid., pp. 174-175. 4 Tbid., p. 174. 5 Ybid., p. 178. 
6 Ibid, p. 178. 

351 


INDIAN ARCHIPELAGO HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


straits before the incursion of the Muhammadans several centuries 
ago.” 

‘There are a number of fine Hindu temple ruins. The native 
Kampongs are enclosed by walls’.1 


BoRNEO 


The enormous island of Borneo? is situated towards the north-west 
of the Celebes and nearly due east of Sumatra. In size it is seven 
times that of Java and larger than France. The bulk of the inhabi- 
tants are Dyaks, closely affiliated with the Malays. ‘ The Dyaks are 
generally of sturdy build and splendid physique, but ugly of face and 
thorough savages in mental and moral character.’* It is notorious 
as the ‘ land of the wild Dyak, the orang-utan, and the great con- 
strictor snakes, the land of vast impenetrable jungle and mosquito- 
infested swamps.”4 

In the native State of Kotei, East Borneo, several inscribed stones 
have been discovered. These are undated documents. On the 
palaeographical ground they have been placed between A.D. 400 
and 450.° All the four inscriptions® are written in Sanskrit and record 
the gifts made by king Mulavarman. To commemorate the gifts 
sacrificial pillars were erected. These pillars, like those of Asoka, are 
of considerable architectural interest. They are thoroughly original, 
Brahmanical in religion and Indian in design, and the most elegant 
productions of Indian art.’ 

This would clearly indicate not only the existence of some Hindu 
kingdom in Borneo, but also the Sanskrit language, and the art 
and architecture of the Hindu type. There are, however, no more 
architectural remains available, 


1 Walcott, Java and Her Neighbours, pp. 108, 109. 

2 Borneo was for many years a cause of dispute between England and Holland, 
and it was only in 1892 that the island was divided amicably between them, Eng- 
land’s suzerainty over the north-western third being recognized by her rival 
claimant.’ (Walcott, p. 107.) 

3 Walcott, Fava and Her Neighbours, p. 107. 

4 Tbid., p. 120. 

5 Dr. B. R. Chatterjee and Dr. N. P. Chakravarti have quoted (India and Java, 
II, p. 17) the views of M. Finot, Prof. Kern, and Prof. J. Ph. Vogel (Bijdragen 
tot-de Taal-Land en Volken-kunde van Nederlandsche Indie, 1918). 

6 A, B, GC, and D, see Vogel and Chatterjee and Chakravarti, pp. 17-19. 

7 See under Stambha, writer’s Encyclopaedia of Hindu Architecture. 


352 


INDIA AND ABROAD JAVA 
JAVA 


The Indo-Javanese connexion has been further established by 
Javanese tradition,! the Kavi chronicles like the Nagarakritaégama 
and the Pararaton, the inscriptions of the Malay Archipelago, the 
remnants of buildings, sculptures, paintings, and other archaeological 
remains, and the Chinese records. The Dutch, French, English and 
Indian scholars, historians, travellers and archaeologists have con- 
tributed largely to reconstruct the Hindu-Buddhist period of Javanese 
history.” 

In point of time, the earliest reference appears to have been the 
passage in the Rdmdyana, according to which the King Sugriva, the 
friend and ally of Ramachandra, is stated to have sent out search 
parties in quest of Sita, among other places to the island of Java 
(Yavadvipa) also. The exact dating of this passage is not possible, 
although the Rdmdyana itself is an earlier composition than the 
other epic, Mahdbhdrata, the kernal portion of which must have 
been composed beforc 500 to 600 B.c. The Greek astronomer Ptolemy, 
who wrote his geography in the second century A.D., refers to this 
island as Jabadieu. 

So far as the Indian colonization of Java is concerned, it is believed 
by many historians that a prince from Gujarat, with some 5,000 
followers, settled in Central Java in A.D. 525, 599, or 603. (It is 
also a fact that the Hindus of Java had been conquered by the 
Muslim invaders before the first arrival of the Portuguese settlers in 
the beginning of the sixteenth century.) A reinforcement of 2,000 
people was sent from Gujarat. ‘ From this period Java was known 
and celebrated as a kingdom; an extensive commerce was carried 
with Gujarat and other countries, and the Bay of Matarem was filled 
with adventurers from all parts.’ 

During the sovereignty of this unnamed prince and his two im- 
mediate successors, ‘ the country advanced in fame and prosperity. 
The city of Mendang Kamulan, since called Prambanan, increased 
in size and splendour; artists, particularly in stone and metals 


1 Sir Stamford Raffles, History of Ancient Fava. 
2 Kern, Brandes, Krom, Hindoe—Favaansche Greschiedenis. A. S. Wallcott, Fava 
and Her Neighbours. Messrs. R. C. Majumdar, B. R. Chatterji. N. P. Chakravartis 


P. N. Bose. 
oon w 


INDIAN ARCHIPELAGO HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


arrived from distant countries, and temples, the ruins of which are 
still extant, were constructed both at this place and at Boro-Budur, 
in Kedu; during this period by artists invited from India.” 

‘ This is supported by an inscription found at Menankabu, in 
Sumatra, wherein a king who styles himself Maharajadhiraja Aditya- 
dharma, the first king of Java, boasts.of his conquests and prowess, 
and he proclaims himself a Buddhist, a worshipper of the five Dhyani 
_ Buddhas, and records his having erected a great seven-storeyed 
vihara in honour of Buddha.” 

Fah-hien’s visit to the island in A.D. 414, on his way from Ceylon 
to China by. sea, for five months, has further supported the Indian 
colonization of Java. ‘In this country,’ he says, ‘ heretics and 
Brahmans flourish, but the Law of Buddha is not much known.” 
Commenting on this, Fergusson says, ‘ that there were Brahmans in 
these islands ‘before the advent of the Buddhist emigrants in the 
seventh century seems more than probable from the traditions about 
the Brahman Tritresta.on Tritastri collected by Sir S. Raffles and 
others **; but they:seem to belong to a non-building class, as no 
early remains of Brahmanical buildings are available. 


Boro Budur 


The famous monument is locally known as the Tjandi Boro Budur. 
The phrase has been variously spelt and interpreted. The most 
acceptable interpretation would be the ‘ Shrine of the Many Buddhas.’ 
It is undoubtedly a Buddhist monument and appears to have been 
built to shelter some portion of Buddha’s ashes, which were taken 
by king Asoka from their original resting places and distributed in 
84,000 parts throughout the Buddhist world, ‘ to be reburied under 
such sacred mounds and venerated by rapidly increasing bodies of 
converts in countries far remote.’ From a critical examination of 
its carvings and sculptures it has been established that ‘ it was erected 
under the auspices of members of the northern sect or Mahayanists, 
the more progressive sect, which, in its growth, took over en masse 


1Sir S. Raffles, History of Fava, Vol. II, pp. 87 et seg. Lassen, Indische 
Alterthumskunde, Vol. II, ss. 1059, quoted by Fergusson, History of Indian and 
Eastern Architecture, II, p. 418. 

2 Fergusson, History of Indian and Eastern Architecture (1910), Vol. II, p. 419. 

8 Beal’s Translation, p. 169, Buddhist Records, Vol. I, p. LXXXI. 

4 Fergusson, loc. cit., Vol. II, p. 419. Refers to Lassen, ref. sup., pp. 1063 et seq. 


354 


ee 


PLATE LVII 


~eee 
eB tae 


« 


Boro-BupuR Page 354 


PLAN. 
CHANDI JAGO TEMPLE. 
NOT TO SCALE: 


Cuanpr PAWAN 


Page 355 


PLATE LVIII 


ee 


INDIA AND ABROAD JAVA 


most of the popular Hindu gods and their followers and eventually 
spread through Nepal and Tibet to China and Japan.’ The shrine 
of Boro Budur appears to have been erected between the seventh 
and ninth century A.D., although Rhys Davids holds that it must 
have been erected in the thirteenth century. An inscription of 
A.D. 656 discovered in Sumatra mentions that a seven-storey temple 
was erected to the five Dhyani Buddhas by the Maharajadhiraja 
Aditya-dharma of Prathanna (or Great Java). It is, nevertheless, not 
quite settled if this temple refers to the shrine of Boro Budur, which, 
however, was built by a prince of the sect that worshipped the 
Dhyani Buddhas and that it is usually spoken of as having seven 
storeys. This fact has been further corroborated by the inscriptions 
in old Javanese on the base walls of the shrine itself, which are dated 
to the ninth century by Professor Kern. Groneman, also, believes the 
shrine to have been in existence in the ninth century. 

‘The fundamental formative idea of Boro Budur monument is 
that of a dagoba with five procession paths. These, however, have 
become square in plan instead of circular ; and, instead of one great 
domical building in the centre, we have here seventy-two smaller 
ones, each containing the statue of a Buddha; and one large one 
in the centre, which was quite solid externally but had a cell in its 
centre, which might have contained a relic or some precious object.’ 

‘ With the idea of a dagoba, however, Boro Budur also combines 
that of a vihdra. There the cells, though only copied solid in the 
rock, still simulated the residences of the monks, and had not yet 
advanced to the stage we find in the Gandhara monasteries, where 
the cells of monks had become niches for statues.’ ‘ The cells of the 
Mamallapuram are here repeated in every face. So great, indeed, 
is the similarity between the two, that, whatever date we assign to 
the one, drags with it that of the other. On the other hand, having so 
similar a Buddhist development in Java in the seventh century, it 
seems difficult to separate the monuments of the north-east of India 
from it by any very long interval of time.’ 

‘The monument may be described either as a seven- or a nine- 
storeyed vihdra, according as we reckon the platform on which 
the seventy-two small dagobas stand as one or three storeys. It is, 
however, either for its dimensions or the beauty of its architectural 
design that Boro Budur is so remarkable, as for the sculptures that 


1 Walcott, Java and Her Neighbours, pp. 205-206. 
355 


INDIAN ARCHIPELAGO HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


line its galleries. These extend to nearly 5,000 feet, almost a mile, 
and as there are sculptures on both faces, we have nearly 10,000 
lineal feet of bas-relief ; or, if we like to add those which are in two 
storeys, we have a series of sculptures, which, if arranged consecu- 
tively in a row, would extend over nearly three miles of ground.’ 

‘The primary construction of the Boro Budur was effected by 
truncating a hill more or less pyramidal in form, filling out and 
slicing off its sides and sheathing them with stone, digging out central 
chambers below the level top, and covering this last with a domed 
or spired dagoba. The Boro Budur is not, as it appears, a solid 
mass of masonry, but a mass of earth over which has been built 
a thin shell of stone.’ 

The present condition of the site tends ‘ to decry rather than to 
enhance the proportions and architectural value of the monument. 
The hill on the top of which it has been built is low and irregular, 
overlooking a plain of waving palm trees. There is a dreary view of 
distant volcanoes and the indented peaks of a line of high moun- 
tains, from some hundred feet above the plain, which is the highest 
point of the shrine.’ 

‘ The form of the structure is that of a truncated step pyramid 
with base dimensions of about 400 feet, resting on a platform 
practically square and facing the cardinal points. Strictly speaking, 
the walls have thirty-six sides, not four, for each main wall juts 
out several times as it approaches the middle point from either 
end. There is not a single pillar or column in the whole structure, 
and no doors or windows are to be found—merely tier after tier 
of galleries joined by stairways to a top platform. The original base 
is now hidden by some 7,000 cubic yards of reinforcing stone blocks 
which form the present visible base.’ 

* Above the present base, the side walls are terraced in such a way 
as to form galleries about 7 feet wide, though one may walk 
between an outer wall, 5 feet thick, which is actually the parapet 
of the inner wall of the gallery next below, and an inner one, whose 
parapet similarly forms an outer wall for the gallery above. These 
galleries run continuously around the Tjandi, broken only by a stone 
stairway at the middle of each side. Their walls are adorned with 
over a thousand sculptured bas-reliefs depicting scenes from the 
life of Gautama Buddha in his various incarnations, groups of 

1 Fergusson, Joc. cit., Vol. II, pp. 424-425. 


356 


INDIA AND ABROAD JAVA 


Buddhas, angels, and saints. Above these sculptures, on the para- 
pets of the walls, are small recessed shrines, in all over 400, each 
containing a Buddha image a couple of feet high.’ 

‘ Above the four sculptured galleries rise three tiers of circular 
terraces, bearing, altogether, 72 bell-shaped, latticed dagobas, each 
about 5 feet in height and containing a lotus-enthroned Buddha, 
which may be seen through the lozenge-shaped openings in the 
sides. From the centre of the upper of these circular terraces rises 
what is left of the former apex of the shrine, a ruined dagoba 
about go feet high, containing in an interior chamber a large and 
apparently unfinished image thought to represent the Buddha 
yet to come. The cone- or parasol-shaped spire, which doubtless once 
covered this highest dagoba, has wholly disappeared.’ 

‘ The stairways of Boro Budur formerly had gate-houses at each 
landing and their arches are ornamented with great heads with 
bulging eyes. At the sides are the heads of ndgas with upper lips 
prolonged into short trunks.” 

The shrine, however, owes its fame more to its artistic detail than 
its purely architectural features. Its wall sculptures are remarkable. 
‘ The subjects are almost beyond enumeration and include practically 
every phase of life and action. The scenes portrayed may still be seen 
in the Java of today. Kings and nobles, dancing girls and palace 
women, peasants and fishermen, bearded strangers from foreign 
lands, elephants and monkeys, deer and horses, birds and fish, fruit- 
trees and shade-trees, native houses, ships, war chariots, ploughs, 
musical instruments, state umbrellas, and hundreds of other things 
typical of the country are depicted here in a way that is wonderfully 
life-like and truthful. The representations of the scenes from the 
Jatakas (tales of Buddha’s life in his earlier incarnations) are par- 
ticularly interesting, for each one has its own story, and some of these 
are very very entertaining.’ For instance, Walcott quotes the follow- 
ing from Dr. J. Groneman : 

‘ The Lord (Buddha or incarnation of Vishnu), being a turtle in 
the sea, perceives a ship sinking and surrounded by sharks and other 
fishes. Taking the crew and the passengers on his back, he carries 
them to the shore, where he offers them his own body as food.” 


1 Walcott, Java and Her Neighbours, p. 212. 
2 Ibid., pp. 211, 208-210. 


357 


INDIAN ARCHIPELAGO HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


There are two other smaller shrines in the Boro Budur group. 
The one known as the Tjandi (Chandi) Pawan (kitchen shrine) 
is situated in a grove at a short distance from the principal shrine. 
The structure has been restored, but the images housed therein are 
now quite gone. The other is situated at a distance of a mile and 
a half. This is known as the Mendoet Tjandi. ‘ This temple is pyra- 
midal in form and about 60 feet high, with exterior walls elaborately 
sculptured. In an interior chamber, some Io feet square, are three 
figures, one of which is definitely identified as Buddha, the others 
being variously denominated as Buddhas, Bodhisattvas, princely 
benefactors or worshippers, or even as adoring women.’ This temple 
was built at a period slightly later than the Boro Budur. 

There is in Java a Hindu group of temples also, comprising 
Prambavan, the Tjandi Loro Djonggrang. Unlike the Boro Budur 
and Mendoet shrines, these temples are monuments of the Hindu or 
Brahman faith. They have been built for the worship of Brahma, 
Vishnu, Siva, Kali, Durga, Parvati or Laro Djonggrang (virgin), 
and GaneSa. ‘ Unfortunately all but two or three of the original 
group of over a hundred had already fallen into the last stages of 
decay and ruin, and today, in spite of the conscientious work of the 
restorers, it is difficult to frame more than an imaginative concep- 
tion of the appearance of the original whole.’ ‘ In the plan of con- 
struction three circular walls enclosed three circular rows of small 
shrines, and in the centre stood a group of eight more important 
shrines arranged in an oblong, three on each side and one at each end 
to the north and south.’ The central western temple is the most 
important and may serve as an example of the rest. ‘ It is pyramidal 
and rests on a base which is practically square. Its outer walls are 
covered with bas-reliefs and other sculptures of great artistic merit 
and careful workmanship, representing scenes from the Rdmayana 
and other tales of Hindu mythology. An entrance on each side is 
reached by a corresponding stairway, and an external gallery sur- 
rounds the structure at some distance from the ground level.” 

There are four chambers and a sort of entrance hall, the mukha- 
mandapa of the Silpa-sastra. In the largest central chamber, which 
is about 20 feet square, is installed an image of Siva, four-armed, 
bearded, and with a snake for a belt. In the western chamber is the 
image of GaneSa. In the room to the south is again the image of 

1 Walcott, Java and Her Neighbours, pp. 216-217. 


358 


INDIA AND ABROAD JAVA 


Siva, the recluse with trident and water bottle. In the north 
chamber is the image of Kali, Loro Djonggrang, with eight arms 
and prominent breasts and hips, a feature so common in Hindu 
art. The goddess is represented in the life-size, ‘ standing on her 
sacred cow and grasping by the hair a small demon or evil spirit. 
This statue is responsible for the name of this entire group. In 
other buildings are Brahma, Nandi (bull), and a few fragments. 

‘The exterior of these temples, built, like the Boro Budur, of 
small blocks of lava stone, are covered with elaborate carvings.’ 
‘ Grotesque representations of the monkey-king and his followers 
recur again and again, as do rather graceful groups of dancing girls 
(the three graces of the foreigners). The incidental ornamentations, 
borders, friezes, and the like, are particularly artistic, and might 
well be adapted to modern use.’ 

‘ The precise date of their erection is unknown, but, as in the 
case of the majority of the ruins of the Prambanan plain, it may 
roughly be given as the ninth century.’ But their Indian origin 
and Hindu style is obvious. 

The Tjandi Sewoe or Chandi Sewu, implying a thousand temples, 
is situated at a short distance from the Laro Djonggrang. ‘ Chandi 
Sewu is neither more nor less than Boro Budur taken to pieces, and 
spread out, with such modifications as were necessary to adapt it 
to the position.” This group has suffered more seriously at the 
bands of vandals and from earthquakes, and no idea of the original 
can be gathered from the remains without a reference to the re- 
constructed diagrams. ‘ In this case there was a central cruciform 
(svastika) shrine of the usual truncated pyramid type, surrounded 
by four successively larger squares of small shrines, two and forty 
in all, and each about 11 feet square and 18 high. The entire 
enclosure, some 500 feet square, was protected by a wall, with a 
gateway on each side, through which passed a broad, straight 
avenue leading to the central edifice. These gates were guarded 
by pairs of grotesque, pot-bellied, knéeling stone figures, perhaps 
10 feet high, with fierce moustaches, tusk-like teeth, and pop eyes, 
and with snakes as head, arm, and body ornaments.’ 

‘The Tjandi Sewoe was built in 1094, according to old court 
documents still in existence in the Solo archives.’ 


1 Walcott, Java and Her Neighbours, p. 218. 
2 Fergusson, loc. cit., II, p. 435. 


359 


INDIAN ARCHIPELAGO HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


‘ There are many more ruined temples on this Prambanan plain 
and on one elevated piece of ground lie the scant remains of a former 
palace of the Mataram days.” 

There is a group of temples on the tableland at the foot of Mount 
Prahu, known as Dieng Plateau, about 35 miles north of Boro Budur 
‘ They consist only of simple sanctuaries and are not remarkable for 
the beauty of their details. But they are Indian temples pure and 
simple and dedicated to Indian gods. What these temples tell us - 
further is, that if Java got her Buddhism from Gujarat and the 
mouths of the Indus, she got her Hinduism from Telingana and the 
mouths of the Krishna. These Dieng temples do not show a trace 
of the curve-lined Stkharas of Orissa (Vesara) or of Indo-Aryan 
(Nagara) style.’ ‘Nor are these temples Dravidian in any proper 
sense of the term. They are in storeys, but not with cells, nor any 
reminiscences of such; but they are Chalukyan, in a clear and 
direct meaning of the term.” 

There are numerous epigraphic references to a number of Hindu 
buildings erected in Java. The Janggal inscription of Central Java, 
in Grantha (Pallava) script and Sanskrit language, of the Saka year 
654 (A.D. 732), ‘ refers to the reconstruction of a Saiva temple on 
the model of a celebrated shrine in the holy land of Kunjara Kunja, 
to be identified with the A’rama of Agastya of that name in south 
India.’ Another inscription found at Dinaya in Eastern Java, dated 
Saka 682 (A.D. 760), ‘ describes the construction of a black stone 
image of Agastya Rishi.’ In another inscription of Saka 785 (A.D. 
863), in Sanskrit and Kavi (mixture of Sanskrit and Polynesian 
dialect), mention is made of a temple of Bhadraloka having been 
built by Agastya himself. In another inscription, found at the temple 
of Kalasan in Central Java, of Saka 700 (A.D. 778), this temple of : 
Tara is stated to have been built at the command of the Sailendra, 
king of Srivijaya, in his own kingdom. ‘ The great building activity 
continued in Central Java under the Mataram princes ; for to this 
period of Hindu revival belongs the famous Prambanam group of 
temples with its magnificent reliefs depicting scenes of the Ramdayana.’® 

Dr. Krom refers to several inscriptions relating to engineering 
operations for the drainage of a river. In a Kavi (old Javanese) 

1 Walcott, Java and Her Neighbours, p. 220. 


2 Fergusson, loc. cit., Vol. II, p. 430. 
3B. R. Chatterjee, India and Fava, Part I, pp. 3, 4, 5- 


360 


INDIA AND ABROAD JAVA 


inscription, of 932 Saka, from Soerabaya, mention is made of a water- 
course. In another inscription of the same place, of 856 Saka, the 
construction of dikes for regulating the course of the river is 
described.1 The Tugu rock-inscription refers to ‘a canal known as 
Chandrabhaga, dug by the father of Pirnavarman, and then again 
to another canal Gomati, dug by Pirnavarman himself.” 

The Dinaya inscription of 682 Saka refers to king Devasirhha who, 
having seen an image made of wood by his ancestors, ordered the 
sculptor and ‘ had a wonderful image of black marble prepared.”® 

The inscription of Vieng Sa refers to ‘ excellent houses for the 
wielder of thunderbolt, the conqueror of Mara, and the producer of 
Jaya,’ and also to the chaitya houses and stipas.* 

The only reference to town-planning has been supplied by the 
Nagara Kritagama (science dealing with the city-plan). Therein is 
given a detailed account of the capital, Majapahita (Bilvatikta), 
‘ with its deep tanks, avenues of kesara and champaka trees, public 
squares, market places, palaces, the royal pavilion (bitdna) where 
the prime minister, the Azyas (nobles), and the trusted five (the 
cabinet) approached the king. In the eastern part of the capital dwelt 
the Saiva Brahmanas, in the southern part the Buddhists, and in 
the western part were the houses of the Kshatriyas, ministers and 
others.”® 

Although no further details are available, it will be seen that similar 
distribution has been prescribed by the Mdnasdra and other archi- 
tectural texts. In view of the fact that temples, deities, reliefs, etc., 
were predominantly of Hindu style, it may safely be held that the 
town-planning and village schemes were also of Hindu origin. 


* India and Fava, II, pp. 22, 23. 2 Ibid., pp. 26, 27. 3 [bid., pp. 37, 39. 
4 Thid., pp. 41, 42, 43, 44. 5 Tbid., p. 11. 


361 


CHAPTER XI 
HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN OUTER INDIA 
CHINA 


THE FOLLOWERS OF Buddhism in the whole world may be roughly 
estimated at 200 millions! or about one-eighth of the human race. 
Of these, as many as 150 millions may be allotted to China, and 50 
millions to Tibet, Manchuria, Burma, Siam, Cambodia, and Ceylon. 
The rest of the 400 millions of Chinese population in China profess 
the doctrines of Confucius, the contemporary and rival of Gautama 
Buddha, and belong to the new sect known as Lao-tse or the Doctors 
of Reason, who are more progressive than others. To this want of 
dominent priesthood in China is ascribed the absence of monumental 
buildings, ‘ because in aJl countries where architecture has been 
carried to anything like perfection, it is to sacred art that it bas 
owed its highest inspiration.’ Again, ‘ religious and sectarian zeal 
is often a strong stimulus to sacred architecture, and this is entirely 
wanting in this remarkable people.’ The want of a hereditary 
nobility and any strong family pride will similarly account for the 
absence of the domestic architecture of a durable description. ‘ At 
a man’s death his property is generally divided equally among his 
children, consequently the wealthiest men do not build residences 
calculated to last longer than their own lives. The royal palaces are 
merely somewhat larger and more splendid than those of the man- 
darins, but the same in character, and erected with the same ends.’ 
Thus the oldest civilized people of the world are ‘ almost wholly 
without monuments to record the past.’ The Chinese are, however, 
the only people in the world ‘ who now employ polychromy as an’ 
essential part of their architecture : indeed, with them, colour is far 
more essential than form,’ but ‘colour, though most valuable as 
an accessory, is incapable of that lofty power of expression which 
form conveys to buman mind.” 

This essential feature of Chinese art has defaced all individuality 
to the temples of the Buddhist, Taoist, and Confucianist. Thus, ‘ ex- 
ternally the temples are nearly all of the same type, and it is only 


1The census of 1931 disclosed 12,786,806 Buddhists in India. 
2 Fergusson, History of Indian and Eastern Architecture, Vol. II, pp. 449-450. 


362 


INDIA AND ABROAD CHINA 


from their interior decoration and by the statues placed in them that 
any distinction can be made.’ Even the Muhammadan mosques are 
‘all in general form identical with the Buddhist and other temples, 
and can only be distinguished by their external decoration with texts 
from the Quran, and are not even to be recognized by the minaret, 
which in other countries has been their chief characteristic feature.’ 
There is also no essential distinction between sacred and seculiar 
work. Thus ‘ the temple, the tomb, and the dwelling are symbolically 
repetitions of each other.’ 

The usual type of Chinese architecture is known as the Ting. It 
‘consists of a rcof of concave section carried on short columns. If 
the roof is of great dimensions and elaborately decorated, it covers 
either a temple, an imperial hall of audience, or the official resi- 
dence of a mandarin, if of small size and light construction, it is 
that of a house. In order to give more importance to the imperial 
structures, whether temples or reception halls, they are raised 
on platforms with triple terraces and balustrades round, and three 
flights of steps on the south front. The flight in the middle is subdivided 
into three, the central portion forming an inclined slope which is 
covered with dragons and clouds in relief, in some cases the treads 
of the steps on each side are also carved with dragons in relief, the 
terraces, balustrades and steps being all in white marble.’ 

The building materials are of various kinds. The city walls are 
built in brick, and the bridges in stone, with marble casing and 
balustrades. The raised platforms for altars, as well as some temples, 
and generally the imperial halls, are also built in marble. All other 
Chinese constructions are in timber. The roofs are covered with 
glazed tiles, yellow in imperial structures, and green, blue, or purple 
for others. The ridge and hip rolls, with the dragons and fishes which 
surmount their roofs,.are all in glazed terra-cotta.”+ 

The Temple of Heaven, or the Great Dragon, a most magnificent 
temple built about the year a.D. 1420, is situated close to the southern 
wall of the capital city of Pekin, in a square enclosure measuring about 
a mile each way. From the outer gate a raised causeway leads to 
the temple, on either side of which, for the accommodation of the 
priests, are numerous buildings approached by frequent flights of 
steps leading down to a park beautifully planted. In the centre 


1 Fergusson, History of Indian and Eastern Architecture, Vol. II, p. 456. 
363 


OUTER INDIA HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


part of the enclosure are two altars, distinguished as the north and 
south. The south altar consists of a circular platform of three con- 
centric terraces, the upper one go feet in diameter, the middle terrace 
150 feet, and the lower one 210 feet, all enclosed with balus- 
trades and raised about 6 feet, one above the other. These terraces 
are ascended by four flights of steps on the north, east, south, and 
* west sides respectively. In the centre of the platform are the five 
sacred vessels found in all Buddhist temples, over which a canopy 
is erected on the occasion of a celebration. There are eight flights 
of steps to the north altar, three of which are placed side by side 
on the north end, the central] portion of the middle flight forming 
a gradual slope and covered with dragons and clouds in relief. In 
the centre of the upper terrace is the circular structure known as 
the Heaven’s Palace. It has the appearance of a three-storeyed 
structure, but in reality consists of a central hall go feet in height 
with double aisles round. The roof, with its widely projecting eaves, 
and the drum below, are carried by four immense columns, 4 feet in 
diameter ; the second roof and drum are carried by twelve columns, 
as also the lower storey. The construction is of a very extraordinary 
kind. At the level of the upper part of the second roof, carved beams 
are tenoned into the four columns, over which, between each, are 
provided two other columns, forming a sort of attic storey, to support 
the roof and the internal dome.1 

Although all temples in China, whether Confucian, Taoist, or 
Buddhist, are based on the same Ting type, ‘ generally speaking, the 
temple of a Buddhist monastery is enclosed by a wall, with a monu- 
mental gateway at the entrance and a series of three detached 
buildings beyond, placed one behind the other, on a central axis, 
with courts between, and communicating one with the other by 
means of covered corridors. The first building is the ex-voto hall, 
with statues; the second is the principal temple in which are the 
three images of the Buddhist triad, and the altar with the sacred 
vessels in front. The building in the rear contains sometimes a minia- 
ture dagoba in marble, in which are enclosed supposed relics of 
Buddha. To the right and left of the enclosure, and placed symmetri- 
cally, are other isolated structures, such as the bell-tower, the library, 
the pagoda, and the monks’ dwellings.”? 

1 Fergusson, History of Indian and Eastern Architecture, Vol. II, pp. 459-460. 

2 Ibid., p. 461. 

364 


Xv 


INDIA AND ABROAD CHINA 


The Buddhist temple of Honan is ‘a parallelogram enclosed by 
a high wall, measuring 306 feet by 174 feet. In the shorter front, 
facing the river, is a gateway. This leads to a series of halls opening’ 
into each other, and occupying the whole of the longer axis of the 
internal court. The first and second of these are porches or ante- 
chapels. The central one is the largest, and practically the choir of 
the building. It contains the altar, adorned by gilt images of the 
three precious Buddhas, with stalls for the monks and all arrange- 
ments necessary for the daily service. Behind this, in the next com- 
partment, is a dagoba, and in its rear another apartment devoted 
to the goddess Kuan-Yin, principally worshipped by women, in 
fact, the Lady Chapel of the church. Around the court are arranged 
the cells of the monks, their kitchen, refectory, and all the necessary 
offices of the monastery. These are generally placed against the 
outer wall, and open into the court. At Pekin there are several 
lamasaries or Buddhist monasteries of much more monumental 
character than that of Honan.’ 

‘ The usual form of temple,’ says Fergusson, ‘as seen in towns 
and villages, is very simple, rectangular on plan, with five bays 
in the front, which always faces the south, and three at the side, 
with a verandah and flight of steps in the centre of the south front 
leading to the central doorway.” 

Another type of later temples, dating from the fifteenth century, 
‘ consists of a lofty square pedestal, which recalls the lower portion 
of the celebrated temple at Bodh-Gaya. The pedestal is subdivided 
into five storeys by string courses, each storey enriched with arcaded 
niches containing statues of Buddha, the whole crowned with five 
square dagobas, the centre one with thirteen projecting eaves.” 

The Chinese tombs are different from the Buddhist séipas in their © 
origin and in form. That is mostly due to the fact that while the stapas 
contained the sacred relic of Buddha, the Chinese tombs are monu- 
ments built in memory of the ordinary dead, because the Chinese are 
well known, like all Turanian peoples, as the worshippers of ances- 
tors. These tombs are ‘ often merely conical mounds of earth, with 
a circle of stones round their base.’ 

The Chinese pagodas ‘ owe their origin to the religion of Fo or 
Buddha, being nothing more than exaggerated dagobas.® These 
pagodas are generally nine-storeyed in the south, but in the north 


1 Fergusson, History of Indian and Eastern Architecture, Vol. II pp. 463-464. 
2 Tbid., II, p. 464. 3 Ibid., II, p. 468. ; 


365 


OUTER INDIA HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


the storeys range from three to thirteen. The porcelain tower at 
Nankin and the pagoda in the Summer Palace, Pekin, are the best 
examples.1 The former is known as the Temple of Gratitude, as it 
was erected (1412-1431) as a monument of gratitude to an empress 
of the Ming family. 

It was octagonal in form, 236 feet in height. Its extraordinary 
feature lies in the fact that its brick walls, as well as the upper and 
under sides of the projecting roofs, were coated with porcelain. 
‘ From the summit of the spire eight chains were suspended, to each 
of which were attached nine bells, and a bell was also attached to each 
angle of the lower roof, making 144 bells in all.’ These when 
tinkling in harmony to the evening breeze ‘ must have produced 
an effect as singular as pleasing.’ 

The pagoda in the Summer Palace is ‘ divided into three storeys, 
with additional projecting eaves under the balconies. Four of the 
sides of the octagon are longer than the other four.’ ‘ Altogether 
there is a play of light and shade,’ declares Fergusson, ‘and a 
variety about the ornaments in this tower, which is extremely 
pleasing. It is much more like an Indian design than any other 
in China, and with the circle of pillars round its base, and the stam- 
bha, which usually accompany these objects further west, it recalled 
the original forms as completely as any other object in this country.”? 

The entrance gateways to temples and tombs, known as pailus 
or patbangs, are a class of monument almost universally employed 
as honorific monuments of deceased persons. ‘ The posts or piers 
always carry a rail or frieze bearing an inscription, which is in fact 
the object for which the monument was erected. The most singular 
features about them are the tile roofs at various levels, with which 
they are surmounted.”8 

‘ Their origin is as distinctly Indian as the other,’ declares Fer- 
gusson. Another curious thing noted by him is ‘ that at Sanchi, 
before the Christian era, we find them used as gateways to a simulated 
tomb. In India both the tumulus and the fazlu had at that time passed 
away from their original sepulchral meaning, the one had become 
a relic shrine, the other an iconostasis. Two thousand years 


1 Photo. 499, 500, Fergusson, History of Indian and Eastern Architecture, Vol. II, 
PP» 479, 471. 

2 Fergusson, ibid., II, pp. 471-472. 

3 For example, see the sketches made by Fergusson (ibid., Vol. II, pp. 473, 475) 
of the Gateway near Canton and at Amoy. 


366 


INDIA AND ABROAD CHINA 


afterwards in China we find them both still used for the purposes for 
which they were originally designed.”! 

As has already been stated, ‘ there is virtually no difference in the 
architectural design of the temples and palaces.’ In both cases the 
halls and palaces consist of a number of pavilions rather than of 
numerous suites of apartments and halls. ‘ The resemblance of temple 
and palace is further accentuated by the fact that in front of the 
great hall of the palace in the Forbidden City are similar platforms, 
with the triple terrace, balustrade, and flights of steps, which have 
been described in the Temple of Heaven and the Tomb of Yunglo.’ 
In this Forbidden City the buildings are all of one storey, surmounted 
with the same type of roof as that employed in temples, and facing the 
south. But according to their importance, their height differs. ‘ The 
three principal halls are the Hall of Highest Peace (built in 1602— 
1722) where levees are held on special occasions, the Hall of Central 
Peace, and the Hall of Secure Peace. The first is the most important 
and it is preceded by a gateway and has nine bays instead of eleven 
on the main front. It is raised on a platform with a triple terrace, 
balustrade, and flights of steps.” 

‘ The principal difference between the palaces and Chinese dwel- 
lings of the better class lies in a much lighter system of construction. 
There is the same general disposition of the plan, viz., a series of 
detached blocks, separated by open courts or gardens, and placed 
in communication with one another by covered corridors.’ The 
official rules are stated to prescribe the dimensions in width and 
height for all Chinese habitations, and the number of columns 
which may be used. ‘ The principal hall, for instance, is not allowed 
to be wider than three bays, if for a man of letters only, five, if for 
a mandarin, seven for a prince, and only the palace of the emperor 
may have nine or more bays.’ 

These rules were distinctly taken from the architectural texts 
of India. In the Mdanasara Silpa-Sastra the rules regarding the length, 
breadth, height, and number of storeys of buildings for people of 
different ranks are discussed in great detail in a whole chapter (XI) on 
Dimensions. In the concluding portion of the chapter it is stated that 
‘ there should be one to two storeys in the palaces of the kings of the 


1 Fergusson, History of Indian and Eastern Architecture, I, PP- 475-476. 
®For plan and section, see Fergusson, ibid., pp. 477, 478, and Winter Palace, 


Pekin, p. 482. 
367 


OUTER INDIA HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


ninth order, one to three of the eighth order, one to four to the kings 
of the seventh order, three to eight storeys in palaces of the kings 
of the third order, three to nine storeys for those of the second order, 
and five to twelve storeys for the kings of the first order. One to 
three storeys are given to the crown prince and nobles. The build- 
ings of the architects of first rank, engineers, military officers, chiefs, 
and twice-born in general, may possess one, two, or three storeys. 
The temples of gods may have one to twelve storeys. The stables, 
etc., are built in a single storey.’ 

The Chinese municipalities must have access to these guide books. 
We in India, however, have forgotten all these rules and have adopted 
instead those prevalent in the countries of our conquerors. 


368 


INDIA AND ABROAD ; JAPAN 


JAPAN 


Although the accession of the first Mikado is dated 660 B.c., 
‘it was not till the second half of the sixth century A.D. that Japan 
reached the first step of civilization, along with the introduction of 
Buddhism, from Korea, in A.D. 552.’ The revelations of Buddhism 
‘stirred the Japanese people to a loftier conception than those 
which the older Shinto religion had inspired,’ and ‘its earliest 
architectural structures date from the commencement of the seventh 
century.” 

Thus ‘ the architecture of Japan owes its origin to Chinese sources, 
the earliest examples remaining being those which were built by 
carpenters sent over from Korea. The Japanese temples, whether 
Buddhist or Shinto, are all of the Chinese Ting type. In Japan, as in 
China, the later developments have as a rule resulted only in further 
enrichments, the elaborate carving in the Japanese Buddhist temples 
being carried to excess. In the Shinto temple, on the other hand, 
the greatest simplicity prevails, more importance being attached to 
the quality of the wood employed, and to its structural execution, 
than to any display of diagram work or carving. The pagoda in 
Japan still retains the ancient design and timber construction of the 
earliest example remaining, at Hariuji, which was built by Korean 
carpenters in A.D. 607, and may be looked upon as the original 
type of, at all events, the Korean pagoda.”? This pagoda and temple, 
near Nara in Japan, are square on plan and built in timber. But 
the earliest remains of the pagoda in China are almost universally 
octagonal on plan, and were built in stone or brick. This difference 
is accounted for by the fact that all the early architecture of China 
was annihilated, and that the Japanese examples, ‘in their design 
and execution, present a completeness of style which must have 
taken several centuries to develop’ through Korea. But the Chinese 
style of the Hariuji examples are not doubted by experts. There 
is, in fact, ‘one example with square plan at Korea, but this, 
following the Chinese examples, was built in brick.’ In the first 
century of the Christian era, however, the wooden construction 
developed in Korea owing to the presence of great forests therein, 
the perfected type of which is seen in the pagoda at Hariuji.’3 


1 Fergusson, History of Indian and Eastern Architecture, Vol. II, p. 487. 
® Tbid., Vol. 11, pp. 486-487. 8 Plate LXII, Fergusson, ibid., p. 496. 


369 * 


OUTER INDIA HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


In Japan, also, no distinction was made ‘ between the temples and 
mortuary chapels, and the mausoleum of Ieyasu, at Nikku, built 
on rising ground, has the triple enclosure with three entrance gate- 
ways, and besides the main temple or mortuary chapel, has all the 
independent accessories, such as the torli, pagoda, sacred stable, 
store-houses, library, drum-tower, belfry, priest’s residence, etc., 
which form. the complement of an important Buddhist temple, and 
in addition a winding pathway up numerous flights of steps leading 
to the upper mortuary chapel and monumental tomb.”! 

Thus the Buddhist monuments of India supplied the inspiration, 
but in Japan, as in China, although the composition was of the Indian 
type, the style was entirely different. So far as the civil architecture 
is concerned, the Japanese palaces were originally simple and un- 
ostentatious buildings. Since the sixteenth century, when the country 
came under military domination, palaces have been built within 
fortified enclosures surrounded by’ moats. ‘ The walls, 20 to 25 feet 
high, are built with a concave batter, the masonry of the quoins 
dipping down in order apparently to run less risk of being overthrown 
by earthquakes (as, in the event of an upheaval, the stones would 
fall back by their own weight into their original position).’? Like 
temples, palaces are all of one storey only. The floor is raised from 
4 to 8 feet above the. ground. In their design they belong to the 
Ting type of China, with Irimoya gables like those in the temples. 
‘In plan they consist of a number of blocks put in communication, 
one with the other, by covered corridors, not arranged symmetrically 
like those in the Forbidden City of Pekin, but disposed so as to over- 
look gardens and small lakes. The principal difference externally, 
when compared with the temples, lies in the less height and much 
flatter pitch given to the roof, so much so that they are not concave 
in section, the roofs having generally one uniform slope. Although 
externally the blocks have the appearance of constituting a single 
hall, they are usually subdivided by sliding screens into several rooms. 
Thus the residential block of the Imperial Palace at Kioto, measuring 
about 100 feet by 60 feet, is divided by partitions into fourteen rooms, 
the centre one of which, lighted only through the outer rooms, con- 
stituted the Mikado’s sleeping apartment. The three rooms on one 


1 Fergusson, History of Indian and Eastern Architecture, Vol. II, p. 497- 
2 Ibid., p. 499, see Plate LXV (Castle of Yedo, Tokio). 


37° 


ee ene ee ee a ee ee ee een En < ee _ = | -= ES 
3 | ; SS ————— —————— = = = = — = = —— 
| 


} ea ie BP an > ~ ae] 
ae . pearet 

S 2 ay | 

we “ "— a | 

py OPEL Ot ase ily dle Byers a eM 7S E - 
) POCA SOI UGA IG FAS KA a ™, 


 ITITTTVITT TITTY T IT ARNR ES 


CLM ALAANAAALAAANSAWN 


- oS oom 
a Oe cane SUES SVCSEC Hees sezrseees Pe 


JAPANESE TEMPLE HALL WITH SVASTIKA SCREEN WORK Page 370 


SGEQS Ee 
. SORES SSSA Sonne 


A_ JAPANESE PAGODA 


aes 


PLATE LIX(b) 


Page 371 


Piva v uo 


INDIA AND ABROAD JAPAN 


side of this block form a suite in which the floors are raised slightly 
one above the other, the further and highest room furnished with a 
raised dais indicating the position of the imperial throne. Access 
to all the rooms in a subdivided block is obtained by the external 
verandah which constitutes the principal feature in all Japanese 
houses.’ The palaces of the shoguns, or military regents, ‘ follow much 
on the same lines as those of the Mikado. The fortified enclosures 
round them are, however, increased in number, those of the castle 
at Kunamoto, now destroyed, which was built by Kato Kyomasa 
towards the end of the sixteenth century, resembling somewhat the 
castles of the middle ages with two or three outer courts and a keep 
within the inner enclosure.”! 

The simplest architectural expression of the Japanese palaces is 
non-existent in the ordinary dwelling-house. The entrance door 
is the only feature which distinguishes one house from another, 
otherwise the street in the great cities presents a dull appearance 
with monotonous houses. The houses have rarely an upper storey 
and ‘the design consists of a square or rectangular block covered 
with a tiled roof, the interior being subdivided into rooms by sliding 
screens about 6 feet high. In the better houses there may sometimes 
be internal courts with buildings on all sides or all round.’ This is 
a plan commonly followed in India, and has been in vogue since the 
very early period and minutely elaborated in the Mdnasara and other 
Silpa-Sastras. 

‘ The chief feature of the Japanese house is the verandah, which 
faces the gardens and serves as a passage to all the rooms. The 
floor of the house is raised about 10 inches above the ground, there 
being no basement of any kind, and the importance of the room 
depends on the number of mats which cover the floor. Those mats 
measure 6 feet by 3 feet each. In a middle-class dwelling the chief 
reception room may have fifteen or sixteen mats, the smaller rooms 
four to eight or ten, by pushing aside the screens the whole house 
can be thrown into one room, and, as a rule, the side facing the 
south is thrown open during the day to ventilate the house. The 
decoration of the interior is confined to the upper part of the walls 

above the screens.” 


1¥Fergusson, History of Indian and Eastern Architecture, 11, pp. 499-501. 
2 Ibid., II, p. 501. 


37% 


Se ee eee ee 


OUTER INDIA HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


CENTRAL AMERICA 


The Yucatan Peninsula is in the Mexican territory of Quintana 
Roo. It is an uninhabited peninsula lying between the Chetumal 
Bay and the Caribbean Sea. It is equally desolate between the Bay 
and the Great Bacalar Lagoon. Before the Spanish conquest of 
Yucatan it was the home of the Maya clans. The ancient Maya 
manuscript book of Chilan Balam of Chumayel records the migra- 
tions of Maya clans and describes also the migration of the Itzas 
from Chichenitza to Coba, which is about 50 miles to the east of 
Chichenitza. The British Museum Guide to the Maudsley Collec- 
tion of Maya Sculptors has further reference to the period of the 
Mayas. 

Along the east coast of Yucatan live the Santa Cruz Indians, 
the direct descendants of the ancient Mayas. They have never been 
subdued, and ‘ for five centuries they have successfully resisted all 
the efforts, first of the Spaniards and later of the Mexicans, to conquer 
their country. These Indians, so far as is known, live the lives of 
ancestors of a thousand years ago. They worship the same gods 
and perform the ancient religious ceremonies.’ 

Dr. Gann was the first to discover the ruins of the great city of 
- Coba, through information found in a recent translation of the Maya 
manuscript book. He has also discovered a monolith and a once 
populous site in the forests of Yucatan. ‘It is a block of greyish 
schist, 12 feet long, 18 inches wide, and 12 inches thick. It had 
at one time stood upright, but now lay flat and embedded in the 
ground. Upon one edge faint traces of sculpture were visible, 
but the greater part of the exposed surfaces had been worn quite 
smooth by the tropical downpours of an unknown number of rainy 
seasons. This has been the fate of many Maya inscriptions.’ 

‘The monolith had been erected just in front of a great terraced 
pyramid which stood between two others. All these pyramids were 
faced, in the usual Maya style, with blocks of cut limestone. The 
central one had three terraces and was 32 feet high. Its flat top, 
upon which there no doubt stood a wooden temple, long since 
perished, was one 135 feet long and 64 feet across. Further inves- 
tigation showed that these pyramids were at one end of a great 
enclosure, which was surrounded by a massive stone wall. This wall 
is from 12 to 15 feet thick at the base, and in the places where it has 


372 


‘ PLATE LX 


a F 


ag fo 


MAYA TEMPLE or PATRON DEITY KULKULCAN UPON HIGH-TERRACED PLATFORM OF THE HINDU SIKHARA TYPE COVERING AN 
AREA OF ONE ACRE, CuIcuEeN Itza, CENTRAL AMERICA Page 372 


PLATE LXI 


Tue usuAL HINDU TYPE OF MASSIVE STONE COLUMNS AT THE DOORWAY OF THE KUKULCAN 
Maya Tempye Page 373 


INDIA AND ABROAD CENTRAL AMERICA 


remained intact, it is 12 feet high ; but for the most part the growth 
of the luxurious vegetation has thrown the stones down and the 
ruins are only 3 or 4 feet above ground. The wall is a mile and a 
half long and forms a semicircle with the two ends running down 
to the shore.’ 

This is obviously a defensive wall. It is significant that the only 
two walls of this kind which have hitherto been discovered are also 
in Yucatan, one being at Tuluum, on the east coast, and the other 
at Chicken Itza, in the northern interior. 

‘ The space enclosed by this wall had evidently been densely popu- 
lated in bygone times. For in the places where the Indians have 
cleared the undergrowth away, one could see that the ground was 
literally covered with potsherds, flint and obsodian chips, clay beads, 
spindle whorls, small human and animal heads, and other surviving 
evidences of human habitation. A great concourse of people must 
have lived there for many generations.’ 

The vast cave of Loltum is entered by ‘ great well-like holes in 
the north, through which one descends by ladders from ledge to ledge, 
arriving in immense rocky chambers whose floors are covered with 
stalagmites and cave earth, and from whose lofty roofs depend vast 
stalactites. Two of these holes are a mile apart. From the great 
chambers unexplored passages branch out in every direction.’ 

It is believed that ‘ subterranean passages from this cavern reach 
to the ruined city of Chicken Itza, 20 miles away. There is a tradition 
that during one of the innumerable internecine wars amongst the 
Mayas, which followed the breaking up of the central authority 
after the conquest of Mayapan, the inhabitants of a neighbouring 
village were driven to take refuge in this cave by a band of their 
enemies.’ : 

The Mayas also ‘ erected magnificent temples and palaces, most 
of which now lie buried in the tropical forests. Some have been 
discovered, but there is no doubt that a great number of them yet 
remain to be discovered.’ 

These discoveries of Dr. Gann and Professor Morley of the 
Carnegie Institute are of great historical interest. The dates on the 
monoliths have been deciphered. Dr. Gann himself places the begin- 
ning of the Maya chronology in 3381 B.c. But it is considered to 
be mythological. According to Spinder’s correlation the date on 
Dr. Gann’s monolith corresponds to October 26, a.D. 333. Maya 


373 


OUTER INDIA © HINDN ARCHITECTURE IN 


Asura of the Mahabharata, who built a wonderful hall for the king 
Yudhishthira, has been elaborately referred to above.1 There are 
a number of manuscripts of the Silpa-Sdstra ascribed to Maya.? As 
an architect, Maya is mentioned in the Purdpas and other Sanskrit 
works also.® 

The scanty remains of the Mayas of Central America, however, 
do not supply details for a satisfactory comparison with the temples, 
palaces, dwellings, etc., elaborately described in the Manasdra and 
other Silpa-sastras. But the walls referred to by Dr. Gann look like the 
city walls described in the Manasara. If the city within these walls 
could be identified together with its buildings, roads, plan, etc., it 
is not unlikely that we might have found there one of the numerous 
town-plannings minutely described in the Silpa-Sastras. It is, however, 
fortunate that Professor Grafton Elliot Smith, of University College, 
London, has been able to establish the Indian connexion with the 
Central American Maya ruins through the Indian Archipelago or 
Insulindia, of whose monuments a full account has been given in 
the preceding chapter. 

Professor Elliot Smith disagrees with Dr. Gann and emphati- 
cally declares that the causeway that has been found was not built 
for the purposes of human sacrifices. There are similar causeways 
in Cambodia, ‘which were designed purely for ceremonial pur- 
poses.” They may represent the circumambulatory path (pradak- 
shina) which is a common feature of Hindu architecture frequently 
referred to in the Manasdra and other Silpa-Sastras. 

‘The whole Maya remains as discovered show,’ declares Pro- 
fessor Elliot Smith, ‘ the closest possible relation with the civilization 
as it existed in Java and South-East. Asia to what has been found 
in Yucatan. There is nothing in my mind that suggests that the 
form of civilization is indigenous, and I should be inclined to hold 
that the temples at Java were the prototypes of what has been found 
in Yucatan.’ 

‘Unquestionably in the early days perishable wood structures 
were built,’ continues the Professor, ‘ but when stone supplanted 
wood, you find pyramids being built precisely on the same lines that 


1 See above, pp. 247, 400 and note. 


2 See ppe I 59-161, 205, 253, and the writer’s Encyclopaedia of Hindu Architecture, 
Appendix I, sub voce. 


3 E.g. Matsya-Purana, see above, pp. 245, 246, 247; 79, 97, 168, 169, 170, 171. 
374 


PLATE LXII 


Tue SARNATH TYPE OF MAYA GATE UNDERNEATH THE HALL OF THOUSAND PILLARS AT CuicHEN Itza 
Page 374 


Tyre OF PILLAR (UNDER CONSTRUCTION) SvAsTIKA Mansion (Fast VERANDAH) 


PLATE Lxtitt 


Page 375 


alt 


« 


ee 


INDIA AND ABROAD CENTRAL AMERICA 


they were built in South-East Asia. . . . It is necessary to remember 
that, as Indian civilization spread eastwards, the type of pyramid, 
established by them become fashionable and was built in stone. 
‘Further there was no question but that Maya carvings represented 
Indian elephants and Indians with typical head-dresses.’ 

Professor Elliot Smith explains how the Indian civilization pene- 
trated into Central America: ‘Indian navigator, it was known, 
had combed out the islands in the Pacific, such as Easter Island and 
many others, and it was unthinkable that they should not have 
discovered a continent that stretched from pole to pole.’ 

Thus under Asiatic, or rather Indian, influence the Central 
American civilization ‘rose to great heights, but had already col- 
lapsed before the advent of the Spaniards, who may have given it 
the coup de grace.’ ‘ The Maya civilization rose and fell. It fell so soon 
as the energy of the driving force that inspired it declined. That is,’ 
declares the Professor, ‘ our view, and we do not believe in an in- 
digenous culture that rose through its own impetus, and that fell 
as a result of foreign invasion.’ ‘ At University College,’ concludes 
Professor Elliot Smith, ‘ we are absolutely convinced that the Maya 
civilization (of Central America) was directly derived from India.”+ 


1¢ Central News,’ quoted from the Morning Post, by the Statesman, March 21, April 
9, 17, 25, 1926, vide for fuller details and references, the writer’s Encyclopaedia of 
Hindu Architecture, Appendix I, under Maya. 


375 


APPENDIX I 
INDO-PERSIAN ARCHITECTURE? 


‘ FREQUENT ALLUSIONS TO the inhabitants of the western zone of the 
Tran Plateau are found in Assyrian documents from about the eighth 
century B.c. They belonged to the Aryan family and were closely 
related to the Indo-Aryan. The kinship existing between the two 
branches was unsuspected by antiquity, and is clear beyond doubt 
to modern science, which bases its conclusions on the striking resemb- 
lance observable in the languages, the religious ideas, and even the 
original rites and physical characteristics of the Indo-Aryans and 
Persians.’ 

These linguistic, religious, and physical resemblances seem to 
have induced several scholars and historians, including archaeologists, 
to seek further resemblance between the Persian and the Indian 
architecture. The procedure of investigation appears to have been 
based on a larger assumption that in all matters of refinement and 
culture the West must have been the creditors and the East the 
borrowers. The possibility of indigenous growth was never taken 
into consideration except in case of the Veda. 

The admission made in this connexion by Kennedy is free and 
frank. ‘The pre-historic age in India is distinguished, not by 
periods of stone and copper and bronze, but by the spread of the 
Aryans, the consolidation of societies, and the elaboration of a cult. 
With the sixth and fifth centuries B.c. we reach the commencement 
of personal and dated history, and a great creative era—the age of 
Mahavira and of Buddha. But the material preceded the spiritual. 
The first stir of that new life arose from the contact with Western 
civilization, the breath of inspiration came from Babylon, and then 
from Persia. When the Greeks arrived, they found great and civilized 
peoples whose learning and whose capitals aroused their admiration. 
The records of that civilization were written on palm-leaves and on 


1 Originally published in (i) The Calcutta Review, February, 1930 ; (ii) Oriental 
Studies, Commemoration Volume of C. E. Pavry, 1933, PP- 3-14- 


376 


INDIA AND ABROAD NO BABYLONIAN INFLUENCE 


bark, or exhibited in brick and wood—things perishable, which have 
perished, and we are perforce reduced to search painfully among 
the flotsam and jetsam of time for any vestiges of the grandeur of 
antiquity.’ 

Then follows an interesting note: ‘ The progress of the Indians 
was necessarily of the slowest, for Persia could supply them with 
cee any models, and they had to discover everything them- 
selves.’ 

‘ Of the decoration of the earlier Buddhist monasteries we know 
practically nothing, but the decoration of the later vihdra caves 
of Nalanda, and of the sanghdrdmas of Gandhara, was Persian, 
and that not so much after the fashion of the Sassanians as of the 
Achaemenids. There is the same lavish employment of colour, 
the use of enamelled or metallic tiles upon the roof, the gilded rafters 
and elaborately painted ceilings, the rich capitals of the pillars, 
the application of inlaying. Thé two schemes of decoration are sub- 
stantially the same.” 

‘To the general question, then, concerning the direct influence 
of Babylon on Indian art, we must answer no.’ But Kennedy 
thinks that ‘ a direct influence may be traced in one particular class 
of buildings and one particular locality—the Buddhist ozhara caves 
of Western India. . . . The four or five-storeyed vthdras... un- 
doubtedly recall the impression of a Babylonian zgurat or temple, 
but are hollow throughout and built of wood.’ In a note Kennedy 
adds, ‘ Fergusson has attempted® to connect certain Burmese and 
Sinhalese dagobas with the Babylonian type, and has suggested that 
connecting links once existed in brick and plaster in the valley of 
the Ganges. But there are two objections: (1) Had massive build- 
ings of solid brick, either temples or vthdras, ever existed in the valley 
of the Ganges, they could not fail to have left their traces, as the stupas 
have done. (2) The Indian buildings, so far as we know (apart from 
the stipas, which are not buildings at all) were not solid, but hollow.” 

‘The Babylonian zigurats represented exactly on a large scale 
the same idea of a mountain . . . the storied vihdras of India, with 
their retreating stages, are also imitation mountains. The artificial 
mountain of the Indians was necessarily a hollow shell, because all 

1 F.R.A.S., 1898, p- 287. ® Tbid., pp. 284-285. 

3 History of Indian Architecture, pp. 202, 618, and Cave Temples of India, p. 34. 

47.R.AS., ibid., p. 285. 


377 


INDO-PERSIAN ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


their constructions was of brick and wood. . . . But the towering 
vihara became a very different structure from the solid stories of the 
Zigurat, for India has rarely borrowed anything which she has 
not altered in adapting it.’ This is a very convenient assumption. 
Kennedy himself admits that when he says, ‘ but we may conjecture 
that zigurat and vikdra had a common origin,’ but he is generous 
to confess that ‘ these speculations may be fanciful,’ and he ‘ will 
not deny it.” 

Thus Griinwedel and Burgess hold that ‘ the Persian style, which 
the Achaemenids employed in their buildings at Susa and Persepolis, 
has inherited West Asian forms in its constructive as well as in its 
‘decorative features. This Persian style, which shows many peculiar- 
ities, is unfortunately represented only by a few monuments upon 
which it is almost impossible to pronounce judgment. But undoubtedly 
its elements may again be recognized in the buildings of Asoka’s 
day and of the older Indian style, dependent on that of Asoka, as 
grafted upon the native wooden style.’ 

‘As chief elements, the following forms may be indicated. 
The Persian pillar with bell-shaped capital was adopted directly ; 
it was set up by itself as an inscription-pillar ; the famous iron 
pillar of Delhi is a later example. In sculptures it is seen not only 
in representation of palace-halls, but also decoratively—often to 
divide spaces, and with many interesting variants. The bell-capital 
frequently serves as a basis for one or more lions or elephants, or for 
a religious symbol, (e.g. the wheel) when the pillar is considered as 
standing alone. If the pillar is used as a support in a building. the 
bell-capital serves as a base for an abacus on which, turned towards 
the sides, winged figures of animals (winged horses, gazelles, goats, 
lions, or sitting elephants) are placed. This last form resembles the 
Persian ‘ unicorn-pillar.’ The appearance of the whole pillar in 
India, however, is rough and %lumsy compared with Persian forms.”# 

Fergusson detects Persian influence on pillars in front of the 
Bedsa cave south of Karle. ‘ The two pillars in front, however, are 
so much too large in proportion to the rest, that they are evidently 


1 7.R.A.S., pp. 285, 286, 287. 

2 Buddhist Art in India, pp. 17-18. For illustrations, see Cunningham Arch. 
Sur. Ind. Report, Vol. V, Plates XLV, XLVI, pp. 187, 188; Burgess, Archaeo- 
ee Survey, W. Ind., Vol. IV, pp. 5, 12; and Cave Temples, Plates XVI, XXIII, 


378 


5 0 
Scale of 


SUGGESTION FOR ELEVATION 
‘21'S ‘lanyivayy, 
NYS&3N YD ‘"M YS 


40 50 
Feet. 


STEPS MAY BE HERE 


© 


© 
© 


© © © © 
© © © © 
©| © © ©:@ 


ASokAN HALL (RECONSTRUCTED) 


PLATE LXIV 


OUT LINE SECTION. 


ASOKAN HALL OF HUNDRED 
COLUMNS KUMRAHAR. 


NOTE. 
This plan is based 
on the findings of 
Kumrahar excavation. 


© ®© G®®O@o oO oO 
© ®@@®OOeO O 
© @OO606 @O 
© © © © © © 


© 
© 
© 
a © 


=, 


=P 
1==4 
begoaeda re 


Page 379 


INDIA AND ABROAD ADVOCATES OF PERSIAN THEORY 


stambhas, and ought to stand free instead of supporting a verandah. 
Their capitals are more like the Persepolitan type than almost any 
other in India, and are each surmounted by horses and elephants 
bearing men and women of bold and free execution.’ In a note, he 
further adds that, ‘ in the Pitalkhora vzhdra, we find the Persepolitan 


' capital repeated with a variety of animals over it, for the Hindu 


artists, from their natural aptitude for modifying and adapting forms, 
very soon repeated the bicephalous bull and ram of the Persian 
columns by a great variety of animals, sphinxes, and even human 
figures in the most grotesque attitudes.’+ 

Of the more recent advocates of the Persian theory, Sir John 
Marshall is stated by Dr. Spooner to have inferred from the Sarnath 
capital that ‘the Mauryan stonework had been wrought by foreign 
masons. Dr. Spooner himself has gone much further, and the idea 
which was almost within the grasp of Fergusson but ‘ missed,’ 
altogether possessed him (Spooner), and he could not think of any- 
thing but Persian in the Mauryan period of Indian history.* He 
imagined to have explored everything as the result of his excavation 
at Kumrahar, Patna, which, however, did not proceed further than 
its initial stage, and could not unearth anything but a portion of a 
badly. damaged pillar and the footmark of what he imagined to be 
a hall. Starting with a preconceived idea that ‘ the style of Asoka’s 
sculptured capitals originated in Persepolis,’ he began to see, at the 
very outset, ‘the peculiar Persian polish. in the columns,’ some 
twenty-three hundred years after their erection, and (from this polish) 
it seemed to him ‘ not impossible that even in its design the building 
(i.e. the hall of which only the footmarks remain) might have been 
under Persian influence.’ The Hall of a Hundred Columns at Perse- 
polis, which is discussed later on, was a square hall with ten rows 
of ten columns evenly spaced in square bays. ‘ At Pataliputra,’ 
Spooner himself emphatically declares, ‘to be sure, we had only eight 
rows,’ but he consoles himself with an equally emphatic assumption 
that ‘ there was every reason to suppose that others would be found, 
and possibly evidence for a porch as well, to correspond with the 
porch in Persepolis.’ He further admits that ‘ the intercolumnation 
at Kumrahar was found to be five diameters, an intercolumnation 

1 History of Indian and Eastern Architecture, Vol. I, p. 138. 


2 F.R.A.S., 1915, p- 66. 
3 See later, pp. 406-407. 


379 


INDO-PERSIAN ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


not identical, perhaps, with that of the Persian throne-room, but 
still,’ holds Dr. Spooner, ‘one which is essentially Persepolitan, 
and never found in any other country of antiquity.’ So far as the 
capitals are concerned, of which there appears to be striking simi- 
larity, as has been pointed out by all authorities, Spooner admits that 
‘no capitals had been recovered in Patna to help us in comparing 
the two buildings, nor had any pedestals been met with.’ Spooner 
acknowledges the importance of the existence of capitals when he 
says, ‘It may be true that, so far as Indian architecture is con- 
cerned, the only substantial point showing Persian influence is the 
capital.’ He further admits that ‘it may be true that no archi- 
tectural plan in India, nor any type of building, as a whole, has hither- 
to been known which one could say was based directly on a Persian 
model’; yet, undeterred even by this consideration, Dr. Spooner 
goes on to build his castle of assumption and declares that a ‘ careful 
study of the stratification suggested that pedestals had, in all prob- 
ability, existed, and the indicated dimensions and proportions justified 
the thought that these pedestals must have been themselves of 
Persepolitan type, round in plan, some 3 feet high, and inferentially, 
bell-shaped, though as regards this latter point,’ he is forced to admit 
that ‘ no evidence exists.”! 

Here it is necessary to observe that not a single monument of 
recognizable condition is available in Persia. Everything has been in 
ruins when seen by historians, and many objects have been cleverly 
restored by several archaeologists from scanty material but fertile 
imagination. But the restorers do not agree amongst themselves. 
The actual condition of the ruins and the manner of their restora- 
tion are pointed out later on. 

As more tangible similarity between the Persian and the Indian 
architecture is apparent in the capitals of columns, it will be perhaps 
better to take into consideration this object to begin with. Columns 
in all countries can be classified into two broad classes in regard to 
their utility, namely, the free pillars, and those which are employed 
in buildings as support to the whole structure and, in ancient archi- 
tecture in any case, as the regulator of the whole composition. 
As regards this regulating column, the question of proportion and 
intercolumnation alone can arise. So far as this column is concerned 


1 F.R.A.S., 1915, ibid., pp. 66, 67. 
380 


A FREE PILLAR IN THE KAILASA TEMPLE OF ELLORA 


PLATE LXV 


Page 380 


INDIA AND ABROAD SIMILAR ASOKAN COLUMNS 


the capital is of minor importance, because in many places of 
its employment it becomes mixed up with the entablature and 
loses its prominency, if not its identity, also. Of the free pillar, on 
the other hand, the captial is the most prominent part. No other 
part draws the attention of the visitor so much, the free pillar 
having no other purpose to serve except being showy. Therefore, 
apart from the consideration of stability, the proportion between 
its length and width and between its component parts, namely, the 
pedestal, base, shaft, and capital, has no significance. But these are 
the factors which count much in case of the regulating pillar, because, 
apart from aesthetic consideration, any error in the proportion and 
in the composition of several parts, will often prove injurious, not 
only to the pillar itself; but also destructive to the whole building. 
Consequently the regulating pillar can hardly be considered without 
taking into consideration the building which it regulates. 

These common characteristic features of columns in all countries 
may help us in distinguishing the really essential elements from 
the unessential ones. Before proceeding further it is necessary to 
take stock of what we find in India and what in Persia, and when. 

The archaeological remains in India could not be dated much 
earlier than the fifth century 3.c., the Piprahwa Stupa building 
of 450 B.c. being about the earliest. The discoveries made at Mahen- 
jodaro and Harappa may take back by centuries the Indian architec- 
ture and other matters of the cultural progress of the country to 
_a time which would make it impossible to further speculate on the 
Persian influence in India in any case. But before the artistic trea- 
sures unearthed in Sindh and the Punjab have been properly estimated 
and the scripts have been deciphered they can be hardly utilized in 
an article like this. We are, therefore, to limit our observation to 
the old materials, which are, fortunately, plentiful for the present 
purpose. 

The extant Asokan pillars, with which alone a Persian con- 
nexion has been sought to be established, and which probably at one 
time could be counted by hundreds, do not number more than a 
dozen. The best known Asokan pillar is that removed from Topra 
to Delhi by Firoz Shah Tughlak in 1356. A fragment of a second 
was re-erected, also in Delhi, in 1867. Three others exist in Cham- 
paran district ; the first of these is known as the Lauriya-Araraj, 

381 


INDO-PERSIAN ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


the second as the Lauriya Navandgarh pillar, and the fragment of 
the other was ‘ recognized—utilized as a roller for the station roads 
by a utilitarian member of the Civil Service.’ The most complete 
shaft, bereft, however, of its capital, is the Allahabad pillar, to which 
a pedestal was added by Captain Smith, but which was again thrown 
down and re-erected by Jahangir (in 1605) to commemorate his 
accession. Four other Asokan pillars are in much damaged condi- 
tion at Rampurwa, Nigliva, Rummindei, and Sarnath. ‘ It is more 
than probable that each of these Asokan pillars stood in front of, or 
in connexion with, some stipa or building of some sort. At least 
we know that six or seven can be traced at Sanchi, and nearly an 
equal number at Amarabati, and, in the representation of topes at 
the latter place, these Jats are frequently represented both outside 
and inside the rails. At Karle one still stands in front of the great 
cave.’ The pillar at Eran, and the iron pillar at Mehrauli, near Delhi, 
belong to the Gupta period; the ‘pillar at Pathari in Bhopal is 
ascribed to Rastrakuta King Parabala (a.p. 861). 

The crowning ornaments of these pillars have been lost, but the 
capitals of some pillars still exist. The capital of the pillar at Lauriya 
Navandgarh is surmounted by a lion of bold and good design. The 
pillar at Sankisa, situated between Mathura and Kanouj, of which 
the greater part of the shaft has been lost, is surmounted ‘ by an 
elephant, but so mutilated that even in the seventh century the Chinese 
traveller Hiuen Tsiang mistook it for a lion.’ The pillar at Karle 
is surmounted by four lions, ‘ which, judging from analogy, once 
bore a chakra or wheel, probably in metal.’ The pillars at Bedsa, 
a dozen miles south of Karle, partly stand free and partly supporting 
a verandah : these pillars are surmounted by horses and elephants 
bearing men and women of bold and free execution. These capitals 
are stated to be ‘ more like the Persepolitan type than almost any 
others.’ In a note, on the authority of Dr. Le Bon, Fergusson 
further asserts that, in the Pitalkhora wihdra, ‘ the Persepolitan capital 
is repeated with a variety of animals over it, for the Hindu artists, 
from their natural aptitude for modifying and adapting forms, very 
soon replaced the bicephalous bull and ram of the Persian columns 
by a great variety of animals, sphinxes, and even human figures in 
the most grotesque attitudes.” 


1 Indian and Eastern Architecture, Vol. I, p. 138. 
382 


INDIA AND ABROAD DIFFERENCES IN OTHER COLUMNS 


It is needless to point out that this ‘ great variety of animals’ 
on the capitals of Indian columns has caused great inconvenience 
and discomfort to the advocates of the Persian theory, because, on 
Persepolitan capitals, the animals comprise only the bull, the unicorn, 
and possibly the lion too. 

Another important factor, which Fergusson himself admits, is that 
the Persepolitan ‘ features are only found on the Jats of Asoka, and 
are never seen afterwards in India, though common in Gandhara 
and on the Indus long afterwards . . . Persian form of capital 
long retained its position in Indian art. It is not stated how and 
why the Persian form did not influence the other Indian types, but 
the fundamental differences in the Indian types are explained : 
‘whatever the Hindus copied, however, was changed in course of 
time, by decorative additions and modifications, in accordance with 
their own taste.’ With such an assumption any slight similarity 
in the most ordinary things of-any two countries or peoples may 
establish relation of indebtedness of any one of the two to the other. 

The great variety, and the undeniable differences from the Persian 
model, of the Indian columns can be verified by a reference to the capi- 
tals of pillars at cave no. 26 at Ajanta (Fergusson, ibid., Vol. I, p. 154), 
at the Chaitya Cave of Kenheri (p. 164), at Bhaja (p. 178), at caves 
of Nahapana and of Gautamputra in Nasik (p. 185), at Sri Yajna 
Cave (p. 188), at Vihara no. 16 (p. 190), no. 17 (p. 192), no. 24 
(p. 194), no. I (p. 195), at Ajanta, at Patna (p. 207), at Jamalgarh 
(p. 214), at Srinagar and at Shadipur (p. 257), in Bhima Rath at 
Mamallapuram (p. 332), Dhvaja-stambha at Elura (p. 346), Dipa- 
stambha in Dharwar (p. 347), in Tirumalai Nayyaka’s cheultri at 
Madura (p. 387), at Vellor and at Pelur (p. 399), of the hall in the 
Palace at Madura (p. 414), of court in the palace in Tanjore (p. 415), 
at Ananta Gumpha in Orissa (Vol. II, p. 16), of an Indra Sabha cave 
at Elura (pp. 20, 21), of Bimala temple at Mount Abu (pp. 39, 42), 
at Chandravali, Mount Abu (p. 43), at Ranpur (pp. 46, 47), at Kha- 
juraho (p. 53), at Gyaraspur (p. 54), at Amwa (p. 56), at Sravana 
Belgola (p. 75), at Mudabidri (pp. 76, 77, 78), at Guruvayankeri 
(p. 81), at Jajpur (p. 111), at Kailasa of Elura (p. 126), at Elephanta 
(p. 129), Kirtistambha at Vadnagar (p. 136), at Udayapur in Gwalior 
(p. 146), and at Brindaban (pp. 157, 158). 


1 Indian and Eastern Architecture, Vol. I, p. 59- 
383 


INDO-PERSIAN ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


This long list of existing pillars, when compared with the shorter one, 
comprising less than a dozen examples where certain similarity with 
the Persian type is possible, makes it all the more difficult to believe 
in the Persian theory so far as the Indian pillars are concerned. 
Moreover, there is another consideration, and that is, in a matter 
like the present one, perhaps more significant. Only the general 
principles and practicable rules and regulations for the guidance of 
artists are codified in standard treatises dealing with a subject like 
architecture. If any similarity can be clearly detected in the standard 
treatises of different countries, deficiency, due to the lack of sufficient 
archaeological remains, can be rectified. But so far as Persia is con- 
cerned there appears to have been no such treatise ever written. All 
that has been recorded in Persia are from the reports of foreign visitors, 
entirely based on their observation of the scanty remains. In India, 
fortunately, we possess in manuscripts many hundred Silpa-Sastras 
dealing with architecture and the cognate arts in great detail. But 
the standard work, Mdnasdra, was not accessible to scholars in text or 
translation until the publication of the writer’s seven volumes includ- 
ing a dictionary, an illustrated encyclopaedia, and a number of 
measured drawings. It is needless to repeat what has been stated in 
these books. It is possible that, from the details gathered together in 
these books, readers may expect with greater reason a similarity 
between the Indian and the Greco-Roman orders rather than the 
Persian columns. Merely the conclusion may be reiterated here : ‘ The 
striking similarities in the names of the mouldings, like padma or cyma, 
hara or bead, or in the names of orders like the Mifrita or Composite, 
may sometimes be attributed to inexplicable coincidence. But in view 
of other striking similarities between Vitruvius and the Manasara, such 
as the classification of orders into exactly five, and the divisions 
of subservient parts called mouldings, common to all the orders, 
into eight, and also the proportionate measurement varying equally 
from six to ten diameters, and tapering almost in the same way, 
there seem to have been something more substantial than mere coin- 
cidence. An influence, direct or indirect, of the one upon the other, 
seems highly probable.”+ 

In the absence of a direct influence, an indirect one through the 
Persian source should have been quite feasible, if there were really 
anything common save and except a few capitals. 


1 Vide p. 231, para. 2 of this volume. 


384. 


— 


INDIA AND ABROAD DIFFERENT COLUMNAR PROPORTIONS 


So far as the antiquity and the variety are concerned, the Indian 
columns are so very remote and different from even the doubtfully 
restored columns of Persia, that no connexion seems to be probable. 
Synonyms of pillars are met with in the Rig-veda! and the Atharva- 
veda" ; the former of which, in any case, must be dated before the 
Kend-Avesta of the Parsis. As regards the variety, they are far too 
many to be referred to: they are given in detail in the writer’s 
Dictionary of Hindu Architecture.8 

The proportion and the intercolumnations of the Persian type 
are also essentially different from the Indian ones. The proportionate 
measures of the pedestal, base, shaft, capital and entablature, as 
well as the plan and intercolumnation, have been discussed in great 

1 Rig-veda, I, 59,13 IV, 5, 1. 

2 Atharava-veda IX, 3, 1 ; Bloomfield, Hymns of the A.-V., 343 et seq. 


8 Anghri (pp. 13-14), Ayaka (p. 67), Ayikapada (p. 69), Uchchhraya (p. 78), 
Kirti-stambha (p. 132), Ganda-verenda, bearing sun-eagle (pp. 161, 674), Garuda- 


Lakshmi-stambha (p. 527), Vajra-pada (p. 533), Vajra (p. 532), Viskambha 
(p. 557), Vishnu-kanta (p. 557), Vritta (p. 563), Sita-stambha (p. 593), Siva-kanta 
(p. 594), Subhankari (p. 595), Sukhanghri, (p. 595), Srikara (p. 597), Saumukhya 


139), War pillar (pp. 661-662), and Welfare pillar (p. O09). For Sirther details 


sources, one might expect, in case of borrowing, to Sad da Ss age US pL aes 
named after the Greeks, Romans, or the Parsis, Dat no sac BQMAeS Be QA De 


as 
Ww 


INDO-PERSIAN ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


detail in the writer’s Encyclopaedia of Hindu Architecture and need not 
be repeated here. Only the conclusions, again, may be briefly referred 
to. The measures of the mouldings of twelve pedestals! classified 
under three heads, and of some sixty-four bases? under nineteen 
heads, have been given. Shafts are primarily divided into five orders, 
but there is a great variety described under the technical names, of 
which a long list has been given above. The capitals, too, which have 
drawn the attention of the archaeologists rather disproportionately, 
have been described under several types, none of which appears to 
have much resemblance with the Persian ones. Lastly, the entablature 
have been described under eight classes.® 

The height of the pedestal is generally from a quarter to six 
times the height of the base. Pedestals are actually given nine 
heights, which are worked out by nine proportions. In the case where 
a pedestal is joined to the base, the height of the pedestal may be 
either equal to that of the base, or twice, or three times as much. 
Again the bases are given twelve heights varying from 30 avgulas 
(of 2 inch each) to 4 cubits. The height of the shaft being divided 
into four parts, one is given to the base, which may or may not be 
accompanied by a pedestal. The height of the entablature, as com- 
pared with that of the base, may be equal to the latter, or less by 
a quarter, or greater by a quarter, half, three-quarters or twice. In 
cubit measure, these six heights may vary from 44 to 7 cubits. 
The height of the entablature, when compared with that of the 
shaft, may be half or three-quarters, or equal to, or greater by 
a quarter, half, or three-quarters of the latter. 

Similarly the capitals are varied at pleasure, though not without 
regard to the diameter and length of the shaft, and the forms of 
the plainest of them are found, at a distant view, to bear some resemb- 
lance to the Doric and Ionic capitals, but those of a more elaborate 
kind are sometimes so overloaded with a sort of filigree ornaments 
as to destroy the effect of the beautiful proportions of the whole.* 

The capital given to the first design is from a model found at 
Tiruvottiyur, near Madras, and is called taraiga (wave)-bodhikd. It is 
one diameter high, and projects equal to its height.® The other 
form is from a temple at Mayalapura. It is called suru-bodhika or 
roll capital. The height of the third capital, called Phalaka, is 

1 See the writer’s Encyclopaedia, under Upapitha. 2 Tbid., under Adhishthana, 


3 Tbid., under Prastara. 4 The writer’s Dictionary, ibid., p. 704. 
5 Tbid., p. 680. 


386 


INDIA AND ABROAD DIFFERENT INTERCOLUMNATION 


three-quarters of the lower diameter of the column and is divided 
into thirteen parts. Its projection is one diameter.1 The capital 
in the fourth variety takes three-quarters of the diameter.? The 
fifth capital, called Pushpabandha or band of flower, is equal to the 
upper diameter of the column. Its projection is equal to its height, 
but its altitude may be equal to the higher, lower, or the middle 
diameter of the column; and its breadth may be equal to its 
height, or four or five diameters.? There are many other varieties 
which are hardly necessary for the present purpose. We may 
conclude with a more general direction : ‘a capital, the height of 
which is from one to two diameters, and the breadth twice its 
height, is of the superior sort; that which in height is half the 
diameter, and in breadth from one to three diameters, is of the 
inferior sort.’$ 

The plan of the Hindu columns admits of every shape, and is 
frequently found in the round, quadrangular, and octangular forms, 
although sixteen-sided and thirty-two-sided cnes are also met with. 
They are richly adorned with sculptured ornaments.® 

The intercolumnation may be two, three, four, or five diameters : 
it is measured in three ways—fust, from the inner extremity of the 
base of one pillar to that of another ; secondly, from the centres of 
the two pillars ; and, thirdly, from the outer extremities of the pillars, 
including the two bases. There seems to be no fixed intercolumna- 
tion. This has been left to the discretion of architects, who are, 
however, required to be particularly careful with regard to beauty 
and utility.® 

Similar details of columns may be briefly quoted from Perrot 
and Chipez’s History of Art in Persia. 

‘ A glance at the proportions of the Persian column, its thin and 
airy aspect would, almost by itself, make it clear that it would have 
been a poor support for a stone entablature.’’? We have seen above 
that the Indian column is generally bulky. ‘The shaft of the 
Persian column is always tall and slender. In the Palace of the thirty- 
six columns at Persepolis, the total height of the order, with base and 
crown, is in the proportion of twelve to one diameter of the shaft ; 
whilst in the Pasargadae specimen, whose capital has disappeared, 

, . . : 2 Jbid., pp. : 
signa nd ita Oe 

6 Indian Architecture, by the writer, p. 45. : 

7 Perrot and Chipiez, History of Art in Persia, p. 48. 


387 


INDO-PERSIAN ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


the proportions are more airy and light.’ ‘The Susian column, 
whose head is now in the Louvre, best characterizes the architecture 
of the Achaemenide sovereigns.”* 

‘ The shaft in all the orders of the edifices is slender and slightly 
tapering towards the top. It is fluted in all instances save in the 
facades of the necropolis at Persepolis, and the single column that still 
remains of the Palace of Cyrus in the upland valley of the Polvar.’® 

‘ In the oldest stone column standing among the ruins of the Palace 
of Cyrus at Pasargadae, we have a faithful representation of the 
primitive post, save that its material is stone and not wood. There 
is no fluting, the shaft being quite smooth. But what was its capital 
like? Nobody knows. As to the base, it is a simple round form inter- 
posed between the shaft and the ground, even more rudimentary 
than the cube which does duty now as a plinth in the rustic house.”4 

‘The complex column, with double capital and volutes, rose 
between the four enormous pillars of the monumental Propylea 
on the Persepolitan platform ; it upheld the ceiling of the central 
hall of the great Palace of Xerxes, and formed the supports, both 
internally and externally, in the main porch of the hall of a hundred 
columns, as well as those of the hypostyle hall of Artaxerxes at Susa.’ 
In a note it is further stated that ‘ until recently only slight fragments 
of the capitals . . . had been recovered ; nevertheless the number seen 
by Coste was sufficiently large to enable him to write as follows: ‘‘ The 
flutes of the shaft are cut to a fine edge, and the capitals . . . consist of 
four distinct sections.’ Scores of shafts and chips of capitals were 
disengaged some ten years ago. In Plates (LX VII—LXIX) of the 
atlas published by the German Mission, entitled Details of Columns, 
will be found fragments of the bull-group, along with pillars adorned 
by volutes and the cylindrical form which intervenes between these 
and the pillar. Altogether they furnish all the elements requisite 
for a restoration of the column,’® but not for a comparison with 
the Indian column. 

* All the columns have a base, which differs from one building 
to another.’® ‘The type that prevailed all over the country in the 
golden age of Persian art is represented’ in the great palace 
at Susa. It constitutes the true Persian base. ‘The base is not 


1 History of Art in Persia, p. 53. 2 Tbd., 86, 87. 3 Tbid., p. 87. 
4 Ibid., pp. 98, 99. 5 Tbid., pp. 95- 8 Tbid., p. 88. 
388 


INDIA AND ABROAD DIFFERENT COLUMNAL SHAPES 


infrequently carved into the lower drum of the shaft, and is singled 
with it, hence with it must stand or inevitably fall. Elsewhere, in 
the hypostyle hall of Xerxes, for instance, the base is cut into two, in 
it the torus belongs to the first drum of the shaft, whilst the principal 
member is a separate block—resting directly on the ground. Despite 
the elegance of its contour and the care displayed in its make, the 
base lacks independence, and does not sufficiently contrast with the 
column so as to allow of those charming effects which greet us *4 
in the Grecian and Indian support. 

As regards the shape of the base, it is limited to a few types only. 
‘In the Palace of Cyrus it is a disc, or a reversed quarter round. 
A more complicated shape, composed of a rectangular plinth and 
a torus seamed by horizontal channellings is seen in one of the por- 
ticoes of the Gabre, in the central colonnade of the great Palace of 
Xerxes, at Susa, as also in the hall of a hundred columns.” 

The plinth is hardly seen or can be distinguished. The proportion 
between the component parts of the column is also lacking. 

The Persian capitals, of which much has been made out by the 
early Indologists, may be referred to in all available details. | 

In every case the lower portion of the capital detaches itself very 
abruptly from the column, forms a horizontal line on each side, 
parallel to the architrave and at right angles with the axis of the 
shaft. There is no junction or intermediary moulding between the 
tapering column and the rectangular member at the beginning of 
the capital’ akin to the achinus of the Doric and Indian capital. 

‘If, neglecting minor details, we only regard the shape as a whole, 
it does not seem unlikely that the first notion of it was suggested 
by the crowning tuft of a palm. The lower members of the capital 
would represent the dead twigs as they droop and fall about the stem 
of the tree, the upper members, whose forms look upwards, would 
stand for the young shoots, which dart forward past the sere foli- 
age with a slight outward curve, the vertical stripes that scar the 
surface throughout would be reminiscent of the intervals of fillets 
which, in nature, separate the leaves of the terminal bunch.’”§ 

In India, on the other hand, it should be noted, the analogy lies 
with the human body, the capital stands for the head, the shafts 
for the body, the base for the leg, and pedestal for the foot. 


1 History of Art in Persia, pp. 89, 90. 2 Tbid., p. 88. 3 Ibid., p. 92. 
389 


INDO-PERSIAN ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


‘Stolze (Persepolis, Bemerkungen) seems to think that in the 
capitals of the columns? the animals figured resemble the horse rather 
than the bull . . . the ornamentist hit upon a kind of compromise 
between the two quadrupeds, so as to add another conventional type 
to his repertory, which is not a whit more strange than that of the 
unicorn, found as support to: many of the architraves.’ 

The animals that figured on Indian capitals, we have seen, are 
neither bull, nor even the compromised unicorn, but mostly lion, 
elephant, and man. 

Nothing like the Indian cave temples have been disclosed from 
the Persian ruins. No discussion on the subject is, therefore, possible. 

As regards the funerary architecture, ‘ although Susa would seem to 
have been the favourite city of the kings of Persia, nothing has been 
found in the immediate neighbourhood that resembles royal tombs.’ 
‘ Persia counted thirteen sovereigns from Cyrus to Darius Codomanus, 
including the Magi Smerdis. It would appear that four sovereigns 
had no special monument set up to them in the necropolis.’ 

‘ The internal evidence points to Xerxes, Artaxerxes Codomanus, 
and Darius Nothus as the princes that were entombed at Naksh-i- 
Rustem, whilst the younger cemetery at Persepolis was inaugurated 
by Artaxerxes Mnemon. There are then twelve princes and eight 


tombs, reckoning the Gabre.’ 
‘ All these tombs, with but slight differences of detail, are as like 


one another as it is possible to conceive; to describe one is to des- 
cribe them all.’ 

‘ The total height of each is 22 m. 50 c. divided into three portions 
of almost equal size. (According to Coste the length of transverse 
limb of the facade at Naksh-i-Rustem is 18 m. 63 c., length of upper 
and lower limb 11 m. The height of tomb no. 10 at Persepolis is 
given at 24°50c., middle portion, 17 m., length of upper division, 
10.50 c.) The middle and longer compartment, in conjunction with 
the other two, forms what is called a Greek cross. The monument, 
properly so called, begins with the middle section, carved archi- 
tecturally into four engaged columns and a lofty double recessed 
doorway, surmounted by an Egyptian gorge, and a row of dentels, 
so as to reproduce a palace fagade. The upper portion of this door- 
way is solid rock, but the lower section is cut away, so as to provide 

1Hypostyle hall of Xerxes at Persepolis, Perrot and Chipiez, no. 31 (p. gr), 
no. 32 (p. 93), no. 38 (p. 97), no. 43 (p. 112), no. 44 (p. 115). 


59° 


INDIA AND ABROAD DIFFERENT FUNERARY MONUMENTS 


an entrance to the vault excavated in the mass behind. The field 
contains a bas-relief of an essentially religious character: upon a 
stage the king is seen on a pedestal raised by four steps, in the act 
of worshipping. . . . Above, between the king and the altar, floats 
the image of Ahura-Mazda, borne on huge wings, behind which a 
solar disc is roughly suggested.’ 

So far as the ‘ Tower of Silence’ is concerned it can claim no archi- 
tectural skill or beauty, because it was never meant to be visited by 
anybody except the vultures. 

There is nothing like the Persian tombs in India. The stipast 
and the chaityas* are entirely different monuments ; their appearance, 
measurements, and architectural details are fundamentally different 
from those of Persian tombs. The stipas were erected as towers to 
commemorate some events or sacred spots; as dagobas they contained 
relics of Buddha or of some Buddhist saints. For comparison in 
details, the topes at Sanchi, Sarnath, Amaravati, Gandhara, Jelal- 
abad, Manikyala, the dagoba at Ajanta, and the temple at Bodh 
Gaya may be referred to. 

According to Hodgson, the Indian stipas in Nepal are known as 
chaityas. According to Fergusson,? the Buddhist chaityas at Bhaja, 
Nasik, Ellora, Karle, etc., correspond in every respect with the 
churches of the Christian religion rather than to the Persian 
tombs. ‘ Their plans, the position of the altar or relic casket, the 
aisles, and other peculiarities are the same in both, and their uses 
are identical, in so far as the ritual forms of the one religion resemble 
those of the other.’ But the chaityas were much earlier buildings 
than even the Christian churches, because the ceremony of entomb- 
ing sacred ashes and other relics is mentioned in the Vedas. In the 
Ramayana, also, the Brahmanical chattyas are alluded to. Later on 
chaitya became a synonym for temple. 

The Avesta condemns in no measured terms the worshippers of 
the Daevas or Demons, and, in a general way, whoever does not 
strictly observe the rules established by Zoroaster, in that he exposes 
himself to pollute the sacred elements : fire, earth, and water. 

In the words of Herodotus (1, 121), the Persians ‘have neither 
images nor temples nor altars, these they consider unlawful, and 
impute folly to those that make them. This is because they do not 


1 For details, see the writer’s Encyclopaedia, sub voce. * Ibid., sub voce. 


3 Ibid., pp. 50-51: 
391 


INDO-PERSIAN ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


believe, like the Greeks [and the Hindus] in the personality of the 
gods. Their practice is to sacrifice to Zeus on the summit of the 
highest mountains, and under the name of Zeus they understand the 
whole circumference of the heavens.’ Cicero (De Republica, III, IX, 
14, De Legibus, II, X, 26), by way of explaining the cause of Xerxes’ 
burning of the temples of Athens, says that it was to punish the 
Greeks ‘ for their sacrilege in their foolish attempt “‘ to shut up within 
walls the gods, before whom everything ought to be open and free, 
the gods, whose temple and habitation were the whole universe”’.’ 
The Avesta, however, ‘contains no sign or token of the feeling 
imputed to the Persians by the Greek historian, and more explicitly the 
Roman orator.’ The Persians burnt the Grecian temples probably 
* to avenge the sacking of Sardes ’ (Herodotus, VI, 96, 100). 

King Darius claims, however, to have restored to the people, among 
other things, ‘ the temples that Gaumata the Magi had destroyed.”4 
The original term, of which ‘ temples’ is the translation, is ayadana, 
from the root yas signifying ‘ to adore.’ The proper rendering of the 
word should be ‘ sacred place,’ ‘ place of worship,’ and need not mean 
temple at all. 

On the facade of the rock-tombs referred to above, ‘ we have 
seen the king in the act of prayer, standing before an altar upon 
which the celestial fire is burning.’ Up to the present nothing of this 
kind has been, however, found in Persia, though in many places 
monuments have been noticed to which the name of atesh-gah (fire- 
places) is applied by the natives. But for their dimensions, that are 
on a larger scale than those of the altars figured in the upper division 
of the royal tombs, crowned with sacrificial fire, they might be 
taken as replicas of these. 

Even assuming the existence of altars in Persia, they could never 
look like the Indian altars, out of which the Hindu temple seems to 
have developed. The Sélva-siitras, which are but the supplementary 
portions of the Kalpa-siiras, furnish us, as stated above, with interest- 
ing structural details of the large altars built of bricks, which, 
for ready reference may be reiterated here. These altars were con- 
structed in different shapes, first enumerated in the Taittiriya- 
samhita (V. 4, 11). Following this enumeration, Baudhdyana and 


1Darmesteter, Etudes Iraniennes, tom. II, pp. 129, 130. The passage belongs 
to the first column of the inscription. 


392 


INDIA AND ABROAD NO ALTARS IN PERSIA 


Apastamba furnish us with full particulars. These altars, as stated 
above, were divided into ten classes according to their shape and 
other details: (1) Chaturasra-Syenachit, so called because it resembles 
the form of a falcon and the bricks out of which it is composed are 
all square-shaped ; (2) Kazkachit, in the form of a heron, is the same 
as the preceding one except the two additional feet; (3) Alajachit, 
is the same except the additional wings; (4) Praugachit, is an 
equilateral triangle; (5) Ubhayatah-Praugachit, is made up of two 
such triangles joined at their bases; (6) Ratha-chakrachit, is in the 
form of a massive wheel without spokes, as well as with sixteen 
spokes ; (7) Dronachit, is like a vessel or tube, square or circular ; 
(8) Parichayyachit, has a circular outline and is equal to the Ratha- 
chakrachit, differing in the arrangement of bricks, which are to be 
placed in six concentric circles; (9) Samuhyachit, 1s cwcular in 
shape, and made of loose earth and bricks; and (10) Kérmachit 
resembles a tortoise and is of a triangulai or circular shape. 

‘Every one of these altars was constructed of five layers of bricks, 
which, together, came up to the height of the knee; in some cases 
ten or fifteen layers, and proportionate increase in the height of the 
altar were prescribed. Every layer in its turn was to consist of two 
hundred bricks, the first, third, and fifth layers were divided into 
two hundred parts in exactly the same manner, a different division 
was adopted for the second and the fourth, so that one brick was 
never laid upon another of the same size and form.’ 

‘The first altar covered an area of 74 purushas, i.e. 74 squares, 
each side of which was equal to the height of a man (furusha) with 
uplifted arms. On each subsequent occasion the area was increased 
by one square purusha. Thus, at the second layer of the altar, one 
square purusha was added to the 7} constituting the first chi, and 
at the third layer two square purushas were added, and so on. But 
the shape of the whole and the relative proportion of each con- 
stituent part had to remain unchanged. The area of every chiti, what- 
ever its shape might be—falcon, wheel, tortoise, etc.—had to be 
equal to 74 square purushas.+ 

As regards the temple, the worshippers of fire (as an element), 
could hardly think of any, because the god of fire was never idolized 
by them, and only idol-worship needs a temple proper.? Dieulafoy’s 

1 For further details, see the writer’s Indian Architecture, pp. 7, 8. 


2 See above, pp. 21, 22, 23; and ‘Fine Arts’ (pp. 212-215), by the writer, 
I.H.Q., June, 1929. 


393 


INDO-PERSIAN ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


description of a building in ruins situated in the Susian Plan, which 
Perrot and Chipiez quote but criticize,) would hardly apply to a 
Hindu, Buddhist, or Jain temple. All we are really sure about is 
the aiesh-gah, ‘the sole monumental type and representative of 
the religious architecture in Persia.’ This figured on the bas-reliefs 
of Persepolis and is encountered all over the country. On a coin, 
posterior to Alexander’s, is figured a monument, by the side of which 
a king stands in the attitude of a prayer. ‘A glance suffices to show 
that we are in face of an atesh-gah. Three altars with very salient 
horns rise upon a block of masonry, whose base and entablature 
the engraver has indicated, between the pillars at the angle, two 
parallel flights approach laterally the landing place that Jet to the 
platform.’ 

‘If during the Parthian domination the Mazdian temple thus 
preserved its traditional form, it was not likely to lose it with the 
Sassanidae, when Mazdiasm became the state religion.’ Then 
Perrot and Chipiez conclude with the remark, ‘ that the notion of 
a temple built by a Sassanian prince must be abandoned as illusory. 
All we know is that the sacred fire continued to ascend to heaven 
throughout the duration of the second empire, precisely as it had 
done during the first.’? 

* Religious beliefs which discountenanced inhumation had not 
favoured the development of funerary architecture, and. the mono- 
theistic tendencies of a cult whose sanctuaries at the outset were the 
bare summits of lofty mountains, had retained throughout, even 
when it could command the resources of a mighty empire, the ele- 
mentary and primitive form of the temple, an altar set upon a plinth 
more or less elevated, rising on an esplanade open to sky. Such sim- 
plicity and uniformity as these were in perfect harmony with the 
spirit of Magianism and in accord with the character of its rites.’ 

The principal effort of the Indian builder, on the other hand, was 
brought to bear upon the temples, which have been distinguished 
as male, female, and neuter; as round, oval, rectangular, quad- 
rangular, octagonal, and of other shapes ; as running to seventeen 
storeys ; as having ninety-eight, forty-five, and ten types.? ‘ They 
display an exuberance of fancy, a lavishness of labour, and an 
elaboration of detail to be found nowhere else.’ Even the most ardent 


1 History of Art in Persia, pp. 249-259. 2 Thid., pp. 250, 252. 
8 See the writer’s Encyclopaedia of Hindu Architecture, under Prasada (temple). 


394 


INDIA AND ABROAD NO TEMPLES AND SCULPTURES 
IN PERSIA 

advocate of Persian theory could not think of Persian influence upon 

Indian temples. 

Sculpture is intimately associated with temples; in the absence 
of the latter the former cannot naturally develop. ‘ As to the statues 
of gods and goddesses, it is well-known that they could not obtain 
in Persia until the fourth century B.c., when Ochus, affirms Berosus, 
set up statues to Anahita in the principal towns of the empire. But 
the traces of those simulacra have not been preserved.’ ‘A des- 
criptive passage in the Vendidad-sada may possibly apply to the 
images of Anahita.”+ 

‘No statuary has been found which might have served to 
decorate their (Persian) palaces.”* But according to Plutarch® statues 
were actually made in Persia. He recounts that when the soldiers 
of Alexander entered the capital of Persia they cast down a statue 
of Xerxes from its pedestal. But Perrot and Chipiez think that ‘ the 
so-called statue may have been no more than an image carved upon 
a stela, like those of the bas-teliefs at Persepolis, representing the 
kings for whom the palaces were built.’ ‘ As in Assyria, here also, 
bas-relief was the sculptor’s favourite mode of expression.’ Except- 
ing small figures disinterred in the ruins of Susa, all sculptures were 
in low relief. The only monument left to represent the primitive 
period of Persian sculpture is the Cyrus at Pasargadae, but its 
head, bands, and feet are ‘ terribly defaced,’ so that ‘it is more 
especially,’ admit Perrot and Chipiez,* ‘ from the costume that we 
surmise where the artist took his models.’ 

‘ Simultaneously with the king, the soldiers, and the tribute-bearers, 
animals too have become mere abstractions, and only interest the 
sculptor so far that they play a part in the festival given in honour 
of the monarch. To the lion is allotted the largest place in the bas- 
reliefs at Persepolis.’ 

‘ The fault of these representations resides in this, that neither king 
nor monster appear to fight in good earnest and for dear life. The 
attitudes of the conqueror and the vanquished are tame, conventional, 
and uniform.”® 

1 Zend-Avesta, translated by James Darmesteter, Vendidad, Chap. XXX, tome 
ii, p. 82. See also Perrot and Chipiez, p. 385. 


2 Perrot, 376. 
3 Alexander, by Plutarch, XX XVII. 


4 Perrot, 426. ; 
5 Tbid., p. 436, see the details, pp. 436-439. 


395 


INDO-PERSIAN ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


In India, on the other hand, we possess innumerable examples 
of sculpture and reliefs, both high and low. There is also most 
elaborate literary evidence furnishing all details. As in the buildings, 
so also in sculpture and painting, ‘ an exuberance of fancy, a lavishness 
of labour, and an elaboration of detail have been evinced in India.’ 
In the early Vedic age, God is personified in natural phenomena, 
then He is given a human body, till at last He is conceived as having 
a thousand heads, a thousand eyes, and a thousand hands, etc. We 
see in the Pauranic age Brahma is furnished with four heads, Siva 
and other deities with three eyes, the goddess Sakti with ten hands 
holding various attributes, and the goddess of learning with a musical 
instrument and other objects, indicative of her profession. There are 
given, in the treatises known as Silpa-Sdastras, the minutest measures 
of the several limbs of the images of not only the gods and goddesses, 
but also of sages, ordinary men and women, of animals and birds 
of well-known species, even of fish and insects. 

‘ The Hindu image-maker or sculptor,’ Hadaway observes, ‘ does 
not work from life, as is the usual practice among the (modern) 
Europeans, but he has, in place of the living model, a most elaborate 
and beautiful system of proportions, which he uses constantly, com- 
bining these with those of observation and study of natural detail. 
It is, in fact, a series of anatomical rules and formulae, of infinitely 
more practical use than any European system, for the Indian one 
treats of the actual proportion and of the surface form, rather than 
the more scientific attachment of muscles and the articulation of 
bones.”2 

Although there has been undeniable Grecian influence on the Gand- 
hara (and Amarabati) sculpture, there can, thus, be no possibility 
of any Persian influence on the Hindu, Buddhist, or Jain sculpture 
or painting.® 

The military and the civil architecture of a people are regulated 
by the local conditions. When by instinctive skill the bird builds 
its nest and the lion its cave to protect itself from the inclemency 
of weather, etc., it is but natural that a people should invent thejy 
own defence. It is, therefore, not expected in most cases that one 
people should influence another in ancient times in the building on 


1 See the writer’s Encyclopaedia of Hindu Architecture, under Tdalamang, 
* The writer’s Dictionary, p. 244. 


3 The description of Vahuman can never correspond to that of Brahma. 


396 


INDIA AND ABROAD NO WALLED CITIES IN PERSIA 


their villages, towns, and forts. Nor is this expectation falsified in 
the case of Persia and India. 

Like buildings referred to above, the remains of the old Persian 
military architecture are but scanty for study and comparison. 
* When Alexander invaded the country there were no walled cities.’ 
“No wall surrounded Ecbatana or Susa when Alexander entered 
them, but then, as now in those regions, every town kept its fortress 
in good order. Behind its thick friendly walls the king could take 
refuge and place his treasures in safety.’ Of all the fortresses, the 
best known and the most ancient was that of Susa. The notion gained 
by Dieulafoy respecting the Susian defences is summed up in the 
following words : 

‘ The fortification works consisted first of a deep broad ditch full 
of water, communicating with the Shaiir, and a double rampart. 
The external or first wall was massive and built of crude bricks, 
in width 23 metres by 22 metres-in height. Against the inner lining 
of the wall—separated from the masonry by a trail of small pebbles 
or gravel—leant a mass of earth beaten into a compact mass, 27 
metres thick and 18 metres high. On this platform stood two groups 
of buildings which served at once as barracks and walk rounds. . . . 
The second rampart, 14.m. 70 c. broad, was constituted by two walls 
of unbaked brick, in thickness 3 m. 50c. to 4 m. 60 c., between which 
damp earth was beaten down. Behind the second rampart ran a 
path. . . . Broadly stated, the enceinte was not furnished with 
bastions. . . . Towers had been distributed at the crenelated 
summits of the fortress, and its tracing had been so continued that 
the towers of the second rampart struck the middle of the curtains 
of the exterior wall.’1 This would look like the scheme adopted at 
Babylonia and Assyria. ; 

Recent. historians, excavators, and archaeologists have equally 
found out inaccuracy in Herodotus’s statement” about the seven 
walls encompassing Ecbatana, along the flanks of the hill at the 
summit of which stood the palace of Dejoces. Rawlinson’s attempt® 
to seek the fortress with the sevenfold wall, not in the vicinity of 
Hamadan, but in Media Atropatene, at a place called Takht-i- 
Suliman, has also not been successful. 

1 Perrot and Chipiez, History of Art in Persia, p. 370. 


2 Herodotus, I, 98. 
3 The Five Great Monarchies, II, 268. 


397 


INDO-PERSIAN ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


In India, along with frequent mention of villages, towns, and 
forts, cities with a hundred enclosures are, however, referred to in 
the earliest extant literature of the world, the Rig-veda.? On this, 
Muir remarks,* as pointed out before that, although they are only 
alluded to as figurative expressions of the means of protection 
afforded by the gods, they no doubt suggest the idea of forts, con- 
sisting apparently of a series of concentric walls, as actually existing 
in the country at that time.* | 

In Buddha’s time, in Northern India, ‘ we nowhere hear of isolated 
houses : they were all together, in a group, separated only by narrow 
lanes. Immediately adjoining was the sacred grove of trees of primeval] 
forest . . . villagers united of their own accord to build mote-hills 
and rest-houses, reservoirs, to mend the roads between their own 
and adjacent villages, and even to lay out parks. . . . We are told 
of lofty walls, ramparts with buttresses, and watch-towers, and great 
gates ; the whole surrounded by a moat or even a double moat, one 
of water and one of mud.’5 

Full details are available in the Silpa-Sastras, which are avowedly 
architectural texts. In the Mdénasdra, villages are divided, as 
pointed out before, into eight classes according to their plans— 
Dandaka, Sarvato-bhadra, Nandydvarta, Padmaka, Svastika, Prastara, 
Karmuka, and Chaturmukha. Every one of these villages is surrounded 
by a wall made of brick or stone; beyond this wall there is a deep 
and broad ditch. There are generally four main gates at the middle 
of the four sides, and as many at the four corners. Inside the wall 
there is a large street running around the village. There are two 
other large streets, each of which connects two opposite main gates. 
They intersect at the centre of the village, where a temple or public 
hall is generally built. The village is thus divided into four main 
blocks, each of which is again subdivided into many blocks by streets 
which are always straight and run from one end te the other of a 
main block.® 


i aie neds, I, 58; 8, 144, 1 ; II, 20,8; IV, 27, 1; 30, 20; VIII, 3,73 15, 14 
3 95) I. ' 

9 Tht, 166,8; VII, 15, 14. 

3 Sanskrit Texts, V, 451. 

4 For further details, see the writer’s Indian Architecture, p. 8. 

5 Buddhist India, Rhys Davids, pp. 42, 45, 49, 64-65, Jataka, I, 199. 

6 For further details, see the writer’s Dictionary, pp. 180-186, and Indian Archi- 
tecture, pp. 39-40. 


398 


wy 


INDIA AND ABROAD DIFFERENT TOWN-PLANS 


Towns:are also divided, as we have seen before, into eight classes— 
Rajadhaniya-nagara, Kevalanagara, Pura, Nagari, Kheta, Kharvata, 
Kuljaka and Patiana. The smaller towns are but an enlargement of 
the village, differing mostly in the matter of dimensions. According 
to the Mdnasdra, the dimensions of the smallest town-unit are 100 
by 200 dandas (of 4 cubits each), and the largest 7,200 by 14,000 
dandas. ‘There are generally twelve large streets in a small town.1 

Forts are first divided into eight classes known as Sibira, Vahi- 
nimukha, Sthantya, Dronaka, Samviddha or Vardhaka, Kolaka, Nigama, 
and Skandhdvara. ‘There is a further division according to the 
strategic position—mountain fort, forest fort, water fort, chariot 
fort, divine fort, marsh fort, and mixed fort. The mountain fort is 
again subdivided as it is built on the top, valley, or slope of a moun- 
tain. Everyone of the forts is surrounded with strong and high walls, 
and deep and broad ditches. The wall is made of brick, stone, and 
similar materials. It must be at least twelve cubits high and six cubits 
thick. It is provided with watch-towers. 

In Persia there appears to have been nothing like these, so far as 
the Persian towns and forts can be judged from the scanty remains. 
Of the civil architecture in Persia fragmentary information regard- 
ing certain palaces only are available. Even such information is 
entirely lacking in regard to the less imposing, but decidedly more 
common, buildings where the bulk of the people used to live, and 
wherefrom alone the national life and habit could have been 
estimated for comparison with corresponding buildings in India. 
The historian divides these Persian buildings into three types, 
namely the open throne-room, the walled throne-room, and the 
inhabited palace. 

‘ Capitals, as Ecbatana, Susa, and Persepolis, were not alone in 
possession of royal palaces, there were houses also in lesser centres 
where kings stopped a few days, so as to escape from the extreme 
cold and heat. Polycletus,? who has been cited by Strabo,* and who 
was a contemporary of Alexander and well versed in all things 
pertaining to Persia, writes, ‘ on the summit of the mound at Susa 
every king builds a separate palace for himself, with treasuries 


1 For further details, see the writer’s Encyclopaedia, under Gréma and Nagara, and 


icti . 283-294, 259-262. : 
ri Reonene eae by C. Miller, Scritores rerum Alexandri Magni, pp. 130-132. 


3 Strabo, XV, iii, 21. 
399 


INDO-PERSIAN ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


and stores, a pile of building set apart receiving tributes levied in 
the course of his reign, and which must he kept as a monument of 
his administration.’ ‘ But this statement lacks confirmation. Susa 
certainly had palaces as fine, as vast, and as grand as Persepolis, 
but nothing now appears above ground ; what subsists is buried 
under an enormous accumulation of earth and rubbish, whence 
the English and French excavations have only disengaged the 
fragments.”+ 

According to Strabo? and Arrian,? Cyrus, after defeating Astyages, 
built in Pasargadae palaces and treasuries which existed at the time 
of the Macedonian invasion. The ruins at the village of Mished-i- 
Murghab are supposed to be the remains of these edifices. After 
clever restoration the general plan appears to be this: ‘a four- 
pillared porch, with two lateral chambers, then comes a great 
hypostyle hall, divided into four aisles by two ranges of pillars which 
supported the ceiling . . . the number of pillars is not large ; their 
dimensions, together with those of the building considered as a whole 
do not come near those displayed later at Persepolis and Susa, nor 
are the walls as thick as on the platform of the Takht-i-Jamshid.”* 
Of the ‘small palace’? and the Takht-i-Suliman (the stage of 
Solomon) little remains to give an idea of its plan. 

At present the district where Persepolitan kings built royal palaces 
contains naught but villages. ‘ As to Persepolis, besides anonymous 
buildings in a poor state, four kings have left structures signed by 
them. Amongst all these edifices not two are alike. Again, neither 
the plan nor the dimensions of the colossal fabric, those we should 
call state apartments, throne-rooms, were uniform.”® 

Several important structures of Persepolis have been restored. 
One of these is known as the platform: very little of it really 
remains, but contains four inscriptions and the signature of Darius. Its 
general plan is shown by a carriage-road winding round the southern 
face leading from the plain to the platform; it (the road) then 
went behind the edifice along the first slope of the hill, to approach 
again the esplanade towards the east angle, whence it mounted 
as far as the pair of tombs situated in the rock behind the level.® 
This level is reached by a ‘ superb staircase,’ consisting of not more 

1 Perrot and Chipiez, Bieieo, of Art. in Persia, pp. 257, 266. 


2 Strabo, XV, iii, 3, 7, 8 8 Arrian, IIT, xv, iii, 10. J 
4 Perrot and Chipiez, pp. 268-269, 270. ‘Ibid, p.257- °bid., pp. 282-283. 


400 


INDIA AND ABROAD DIFFERENT MODELS OF PALACES 


than a hundred and eleven steps, which is very common in India.1 

‘Four distinct horizontal plans may be counted on the platform. 
The lower stage is narrow and insignificant: it does not seem to 
have supported any edifices. The second level is approached by the 
great staircase, and takes up about three-quarters of the superficies 
of the platform, upon it were distributed the principal buildings 
—the propylaca and the hall of a hundred columns. Proceeding 
from north to south there is another esplanade, some three metres 
above this, which contains the relics of the most important and 
attractive of all the royal edifices, the hypostyle hall of Xerxes. 
Again, to the rear of this, is reached the terrace which carried two 
buildings, the palaces of Darius and Xerxes. Lastly, a building at 
the south-east angle appears to have had its floor on the third stage.”? 

Dr. Spooner could not find such a platform at Kumrahar, Patna. 
Nor does the high plinth at Sanchi, or the Buddhist railings in many 
places, seem to resemble this Persian platform. 

The propylaca was signed by Xerxes. Its principal remains are two 
great piers some eleven metres high, beyond projects, in round-boss, 
the foreparts of two quadrupeds, right and left of paved corridor, 
3 m. 82 c. broad. Even after restoration, based on such scanty 
materials, it can never look like any Indian building, such as the 
great gateways of temples (Gopuram). 

The hypostyle hall of Xerxes also contains his signature. But 
very little of it really remains. Its general character has been in- 
dicated by Perrot and Chipiez. ‘ Beyond the substructures is found 
the most important group of columns, of which three shafts alone 
remain.’ Originally there were seventy-two pillars, which supported 
the ceilings. 

‘The stone base that supported the pillars tell us plainly,’ say 
Perrot and Chipiez, rather too emphatically, ‘ what was the arrange- 
ment of the apartment. It was a hall 43 m. 50 c. square, and on 
its floor are found the marks of thirty-six columns, spaced equidistant 
from one another, as in the west and east porches.’ ‘ All that is 
visible of another isolated structure are the foundation stones distri- 
buted in two ranges, which doubtless supported pillars. Their 
inter-columnation is 2 m. 50 c. In the absence of any fragment, 


1Compare, for instance, the grand staircase at Sitakunda Hill, Chittagong, 
Bengal, which consists of more than a thousand steps. 
2 Perrot and Chipiez, pp. 284, 287. 


qor z 


INDO-PERSIAN ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


sculptural or architectural, to throw any light on the subject, it is 
impossible to hazard a guess as to the probable use of this minor 
building.’ 

The claim of this hall as a queen among other Persepolitan monu- 
ments is stated to have been established by ‘ the imposing adjustment 
and the wealth of ornament displayed about the stairs by which it 
was approached, the extent of the ground it covered, the exceptional 
height and magnificence of its quadruple colonnade.’ ‘The area covered 
by this hall is stated to far exceed that of the Pharaohs of the nine- 
teenth dynasty. The site occupied by the central pavilion is not 
more than 2,500 m. square, whilst that of the Egyptian colonnade 
is more than 5,000 m., but counting the annexes the total area would 
be not less than 7,500 square metres. This was clearly a reception 
room of Xerxes. 

The hall of a hundred columns, also a reception, audience, or 
throne room, is but an enlargement of the hypostyle hall, around 
which chambers are distributed. It is called an anonymous building, as 
no inscription has been preserved of it, from which it might have been 
dated. It was walled on all its faces, with porchlike colonnade in 
front. In shape the built surface is a parallelogram 75 m. 82 c. from 
east to west, and 91 m. 16 c. from north to south. ‘ The principal 
facade was on the north side. . . . Counting the intervals between 
the bases, we get the number of pillars, which was sixteen, arranged 
in two rows of eight. Two great portals open upon the porch.’ 

‘ By setting up, in imagination, the original brick wall, 3 m. 25 c. 
thick which connected these minor buildings with one another, we 
get the whole area which it embraced, . . . no bearing wall stood 
here. Of ancient structures nothing remains save fragments of bases, 
and when these fail, their foundations, the intercolumnations are 
about those of the portico, 6 m. 20 c., measured from one axis to 
another, whilst all the bases are uniform in shape.? The number 
of the columns had to be ‘made out’ merely from the marks of 
bases left on the floor. They were distributed in rows of ten each, 
and upheld the roof of a square hall. Their disposition is identical 
with that of the central pavilion of the great palace of Xerxes. 

‘In front of the palace we have imagined the soil furrowed by 
countless rills, masked by plants and shrubs which they feed into 
greenness, a contrivance still resorted to in modern Persia to obtain 
the equivalent of our lawns.’ 


402 


INDIA AND ABROAD NO STOREYED EDIFICES IN PERSIA 


‘ With data of this nature,’ declare the archaeologists, ‘ to go by, 
it is easy to restore the edifice.” 

But with data of this nature no comparison with any Indian build- 
ing will be convincing to the average reader conversant with the 
long past of India, despite Dr. Spooner’s advocacy to connect this 
hall with the footmark of what he also imagined to be Asoka’s 
palace.? 

One other general important characteristic of Persian civil archi- 
tecture is that ‘no trace has been detected of a second storey about 
this (Palace of Darius) or any other Persepolitan edifice. To the present 
hour, Persian dwellings and palaces have but a ground floor, divided 
into apartments, the number of which depends upon the fortune of 
the owner. As to the great throne rooms (i.e. the hypostyle hall and 
the hall of hundred columns), their character excludes the notion 
of more than one storey, each shell, being a perfect unit in itself, 
was in no need of dependencies, so that we cannot suppose any 
having existed here. Aught more whimsical than the restoration of 
Fergusson, who places a second order of pillars above the ceilings of 
the hypostyle halls with a fire-altar for the king to worship at, 
cannot well be imagined, and will not bear the test of close inspec- 
tion.’§ 

In India, even in the earliest Vedic period, which must precede the 
period of the Persian halls by several hundred years, mention is 
made of a sovereign ‘ who, exercising no oppression, sits down in 
this substantial and elegant hall built with a thousand pillars,’* 
and of residential houses with such pillars as are said to be ‘ vast, 
comprehensive, and thousand-doored.’® Mitra and Varuna are 
represented as occupying a great palace with ‘a thousand pillars 
and a thousand gates.’® 

There were such other buildings also: Atri is stated to have been 
‘ thrown into a machine room with a hundred doors, where he was 
roasted.’” Vasishtha desired to have ‘a three-storeyed dwelling.’® 


1 Perrot and Chipiez : pp. 326, 341. 3 See pp. 404-405. 

3 Perrot and Ghipiez, PP- 337-338. 4 Rig-veda (Wilson), II, 313. 

5 Ibid., IV, 179. ; : 

6 Jbid., II, 41, 5; V, 62, 6; VII, 885, Atharva-veda, Ill, 12; TX, 3. Muir 
comments (Sanskrit Texts, V, 455): ‘ this is but an exaggerated description of 
a royal residence such as the poet had seen.’ 

7 Ibid., I, 112, 7; Wilson’s IV, 148. 

8 [bid., Wilson’s IV, 200. 


403 


INDO-PERSIAN ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


In the Matsya-purdna, halls are divided into twenty-seven kinds 
according to the number of columns they are furnished with, the 
largest one having 64 pillars, the next 62, one following 60, and 
so on. They bear significant and artistic names: (1) Pushpaka, 
(2) Pushpa-bhadra, (3) Suvrata, (4) Amrita-nandana, (5) Kausalya, 
(6) Buddhi-samkirna, (7). Gaja-bhadra, (8) Fayadbaha, (g) Srivatsa, 
(10) Vijaya, (11) Vastu-kirti, (12) Srutit-jaya, (13) Yajia-bhadra, 
(14) Visala, (15) Suslishta, (16) Satru-mardana, (17) Bhaga-pajcha, 
(18) Nandana, (19) Mdanava, (20) Méana-bhadraka, (21) Sugriva, 
(22) Harita, (23) Karnikara, (24) Satardhika, (25) Simha, (26) Sydma- 
bhadra, and (27) Subhadra. In shape they may be triangular, 
crescent, circular, quadrangular or square, octagonal, and sixteen- 
sided. 

In the Mdanasdra and other texts, where a very large number of 
halls and pavilions are elaborately described, various storeys of the 
halls are referred to: the storeys may vary from one to twelve.? 

In the Manasdara the royal palaces proper are divided, with regard 
to their size, storey, and other characteristic features, into nine 
classes and assigned to the nine classes of kings—(1) Chakravartin, (2) 
Maharaja or Adhirdja, (3) Mahendra or Narendra, (4) Parshnika, (5) 
Pattadhara, (6) Mandalesa, (7) Pattabhaj, (8) Praharaka, and (9) Astra- 
grahin. Hach of the nine types of the palaces admits of nine sizes. 
Every one consists of a certain number of halls, audience-chambers, 
or throne-rooms. Thus the palace of the Chakravartin, or universal 
monarch, possesses up to seven halls, that of the Adhiraja or Narendra 
up to six halls, and so forth. The chapter (XI) dealing with the 
dimensions of storeys, varying from one to twelve in residential build- 
ings and temples, concludes with the rule directing the number of 
storeys in edifices according to the social status of their occupants. 

In the Sabhd-parvan of the Mahabharata are referred to several 
halls belonging to the Pandavas (Chap. I), to Indra (Chap. VII), 
to Yama (Chap. VIII), to Varuna (Chap. IX), to Kubera (Chap. 
X), and to Brahma (Chap. XI). The description of every one of 
these lacks in the architectural details which are necessary for any 

1 Chap. 270, verses 7-15, 16. 

2 For details, see the writer’s Encyclopaedia, under Sala. 


3 For more details, see the writer’s Indian Architecture, pp. 57, 58, 59 ; Encyclopaedia 
of Hindu Architecture, under Prasada. 


* See above, p. 106, and Indian Architecture, p. 42. 


404 


INDIA AND ABROAD DIFFERENT HALLS AND PAVILIONS 


fruitful comparison. None of the ancient Indian halls or palaces 
appears to have any substantial resemblance with the Persian open, 
walled, pillared, or unstoreyed halls. 

The only point of similarity between the Pandava hall and 
Spooner’s Kumrahar hall, which is ascribed to king Asoka, is no 
more substantial than that Maya-Asura is stated to have built 
the former, while some unspecified genii are stated by Fa-hien to 
have built the latter.1 

Thus Spooner seems to have hit upon a further discovery between 
the supernatural origin of Asokan buildings hinted by Fa-hien, and 
the equally mythological description, in the Mahabharata, of the 
hall stated to have been built by Maya-Asura, of which, however, 
no architectural details are available for a comparison, either with 
the throne-room of Darius Hystaspes at Persepolis or with the foot- 
marks of the supposed Asokan hall at Kumrahar.? What Maya- 
Asura claims to have built for the Danavas (genii) may be given in 
Spooner’s own translation : ‘ the palaces, pavilions full of pleasures 
and abounding in delights a thousandfold, delightful gardens, too, 
and ponds of various kinds, and wondrous vestments, chariots 
that moved at will, and cities far extended, with high rampart walls, 
also thousands of wondrous vehicles most excellent, and pleasing 
caves to every comfort joined.’® 


1 Fa-hien’s description of Asokan buildings at Patna is but mythical. ‘ The 
royal palace and halls in the midst of the city (of Pataliputra), which exist now 
as of old, were all made by spirits which he (Asoka) employed, and which piled 
up the stones, reared the walls and gates, and executed the elegant carving and 
inlaid sculpture work ’—in a way which no human hands of this world could 
accomplish,—(James Legge, A Record of Buddhistic Kingdoms, p. 77). 

2 F.R.AS., 1915, P- 77+ 

For further discussion of Maya’s hall, see the writer’s article ‘ Ahura-Mazda 
and Maya-Asura’ (Proceedings of the Fourth Oriental Conference, Vol. II, pp. 
736-751), and his Indian Architecture, p. 166. 

aaa Fat Wat Arar fe WaT Ha: 

warfr garatir were attt ASE: | 

saraft waft axife fafaartr a 

fafacnft = aearfor ararcft <arht 1 

vrata farsi aresrareated Tu 

ataaift Hearts fafaartor TeaeART: | 

faotft <atitaria Gaaraht + YZ Nl 

—(Mahabharata, Il, i, 14-17.) 
3 7.R.A.S., 1915, Pp» 82. 


405 


INDO-PERSIAN ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


At Krishna’s suggestion, Maya is stated to have built a Sabha for 
the king Yudhishthira—‘a durbar hall, or throne room,’ in the 
words of Spooner. But no details of this hall are given: It is simply 
stated that ‘there could not be any parallel in the world of the 
mortals, and whereon all heavenly ideas were depicted in bricks, 
stones’ (or wood). He declares himself as a great poet of architecture 
(a Ruskin), among the rivals of gods, and he is the Visvakarman 
who was the heavenly architect among the gods. 

To Dr. Spooner, Yudhishthira’s so-called ‘ throne-room’ has 
sounded a note of similarity to the Asokan hall and thence to the 
Persepolitan ‘ throne-room ’ of a hundred columns. 

And the supposed supernatural origin of practically all the archi- 
tectural objects in India has a prototype in the Fa-hien’s ascription 
of Asokan buildings to the genii. 

Further, by way of establishing to a certainty the Persian origin 
of Indian architecture, Spooner imagined to have arrived at a number 
of wonderful discoveries,? namely : 

(1) That the architectural structures described in the Mahabharata 
are of Persian model. 

(2) That the palaces to which the Mahabharata refers are those 
of Pataliputra.® 

(3) That the Kumrahar remains, dug out at the cost of a Parsi 
millionaire are identical with the Persepolitan structures (p. 71). 

(4) That the temple at Bodh-Gaya was founded by the ancient Per- 
sians and that Gaya was an early seat of Magian worship (p. 411). 

(5) That the ancestors of Buddha, the Sakyas of Kapilavastu, 
were of Zoroastrian origin (pp. 440, 441). 


lad fe faeanai 4 aarti were: | 
afe a adaraista frat fretaat az 1 
sauster saa argaitfig Aaa 
at dat arHa fet Arear: Tearfafesar: | 
Aaa THe ATE Fe F TAT 1 
a feeqrafisrar wea fe Sateaar 
THOAATTG TA Tt He Ft ATI 
—(Mahabharata, Sabha-parvan, I, 5, 9-12.) 
See further details in the writer’s Indian Architecture, p. 166, and his article 


on ‘ Ahura-Mazda and Maya-Asura’ (Proceedings of the Fourth Oriental Con- 
ference), Vol. II, pp. 736-751. 


2F.RAS., 1915. 3 F.R.A.S., pp. 405-6. 
406 


INDIA AND ABROAD UNTENABLE PERSIAN THEORIES 


(6) That the Mauryas were Zoroastrians, the name having been 
derived from Persian Morva, and that they came originally from Meru, 
which is stated to have been situated in Persia (pp. 406, 408, 409). 

(7) That Chandragupta Maurya was a Persian. Persepolis was 
his ancestral home (p. 409); he probably came with Alexander 
and was left behind to occupy the throne at Magadha, and made 
Persian architects build palaces after the Persian model, remains of 
Which, even with Persian’s mason’s marks, are fancied to have been 
explored at Patna (pp. 422, 427). 

(8) That the name Magadha is Persian in origin, derived from 
Persian Mugh or Magi (pp. 422, 427). 

(9) That a portion of the Atharva-veda' containing the term, 
‘Magadha’ must be of Persian origin (pp. 420, 421, 422). 

(10) That Brahma is not an Indian god, but an echo (or imitation) 
of the Zoroastrian arch-angel Vahuman (p. 449). 

The obvious object of these speculations was to establish an all- 
round Persian influence over the Indian culture, which was no doubt 
older by several centuries. Spooner started with a prejudiced mind 
and over-enthusiasm has misled him from the field of archaeology 
proper to the subtle speculation of philosophy. It is needless to add 
that none of these theories has been worked out, and that none has 
found acceptance to any serious student of bistory.” 

Thus there appears to be no similarity between Persia and India in 
civil, military, or religious architecture. In the light of all the afore- 
said facts, the theory of Persian influence upon Indian architecture 
does no longer seem tenable. There is certainly a sort of similarity 
between a certain type of capital in India and Persia, that is 
all. But the Indian pillar as a whole, we have shown elsewhere 
elaborately,® shows affinity with the Greco-Roman order, and certain 
school of Indian sculpture bears the stamp of Grecian type. 

In the light of all the facts briefly discussed above, merely to deal 
with the questions as they concern architecture, it seems impossible 
to think of any connexion between India and Persia. 

1 (i) That the Garuda-purana also is of the Indo-Zoroastrian origin (p. 428). 

(ii) That the Yoga system of Indian philosophy was derived from the Persian 


mummeries. d 
(iii) That the Tantric system and the Sakti cult of the Brahmans of Saka- 


dvipa, which was the home of the Zoroastrian Magi (p. 447), were originated 
from the magic rites of the Persian goddess Ishtar (p. 435)+ 

2For instance, compare V. A. Smith, 7.R.A.S., 1915, PP- 800-802. 

3 See the writer’s Encyclopaedia, under Stambha (pillar) ; Indian Architecture, pp» 


149-153; 
407 


APPENDIX II 
THE FUTURE OF INDIAN ARCHITECTURE! 


IN THE WAKE of political evclution the march of economic and 
social matters is natural and irresistible. Thus a movement to improve 
the present state of our housing and town-planning, if not our clothing 
and food also, should be welcome both to thinkers and practical men 
alike. Political freedom, just for its own sake, could bave no mean- 
ing. But no real improverrent can be based upon either national 
hatred or racial antagonism. It must proceed from an impartial 
study of history and a true perspective. The dictum, ‘the best 
international is he who is profoundly national’ (appearing in a 
circular letter from the chief organizer of a new school of Indian 
architecture), should be altered into ‘ the best national is he who is 
profoundly international.’ For, otherwise, no real improvement 
can ever be effected. If our aim is nothing more than tc try to revive 
what we had in the hoary past, irrespective of the changes the world 
has undergene in the meantime, we must be prepared for self-decep- 
tion, both in practice and in principle. In order to be ‘ profoundly 
national ’ it would be impracticable, if not ungenerous and ungrate- 
ful, to start with an idea of disregarding everything foreign. It 
will also be a wrong policy to start with an exaggerated notion 
and prejudiced interpretation of historical facts. The above circular 
letter contains the following survey, which needs a dispassionate 
analysis and examination in order to realize the importance of 
India’s past architecture and the possibilities of a future one : 

‘ Architecture, the mother of all Arts, has been most assiduously 
cultivated in India through the centuries. The beginnings are found 
in the excavations of sites going back to a period contemporaneous 
with ancient Chaldea and Egypt: the ruins at Mohenjo-daro and 
Harappa take back the Indian Architectural tradition to 3000 B.«.’ 

‘An artistic tradition in Hindu India carried from generation 
to generation as a caste craft and going back to over 2000 years, 
and responsible for many wonderfully magnificent structures, presents 
a record of which any civilization can be proud. The Turks and 


1 Originally published in the Modern Review, August, 1935. 
408 


INDIA AND ABROAD £SSENCE OF ARCHITECTURE 


Persians conquered Northern India from after A.D. 1000, and they 
brought some new ideas with the Muhammadan religion they pro- 
fessed. But they themselves became Indianized, and the great Islamic 
culture and art they brought merged into the Indian one, only to 
cause it to seek out a new path of development which culminated 
into the great Taj Mahal at Agra—a gem of Mogul architecture.’ 

‘Indian domestic and religious architecture continued in a most 
flourishing condition up till the advent of the English and the invasion 
of Indian life by modern notions from Europe. In British India the 
native arts and crafts dwindled, owing to the craze for the new 
things of the West, and architecture also similarly suffered. India, it 
looked, was going to become a province of Europe in matters of 
architecture and art.’ 

In what sense can architecture be ‘the mother of all arts’? 
What sort of architecture was ‘ most assiduously cultivated in India 
through the centuries’ from 3000 B.c.? Which ‘ wonderfully magni- 
ficent structures’ weie carried from generation to generation as a 
caste-craft and going back to over 2000 years ? How were the Turkish, 
the Persian, and the Mogul architectures ‘ merged into the Indian 
one’? Where has the ‘advent of the English’ destroyed the 
‘ Indian domestic and religious architecture,’ instead of the English 
architecture also being merged into the Indian one? And, lastly, why 
the ‘ craze for the new things of the West’ ‘ was going’ to convert 
‘ British India’ into ‘a province of Europe in matters of architec- 
ture and art’? These are some of the most important questions 
which, raised though in an advertisement, should be clearly under- 
stood by all interested in the subject before an intelligent interest 
can be taken in the revival or introduction of an exclusively Indian 
architecture. 

The denotation and connotation of the term ‘architecture’ must 
be brought home in order to adjudge the relative position of archi- 
tecture with fine or refined arts—numbering some 518 according 
to Yasodhara, a commentator of Vatsyayana’s Kdamasasira. Before 
that, the essential and exact difference between architecture on the 
one hand and civil engineering or mere art of building on the other 
hand should be made clear. The same structure, say, a railway 
station or a newspaper office may be built both architecturally as 
well as an object of mere engineering. If the main object of the 
railway building and the newspaper office were to supply necessary 


499 


FUTURE OF INDIAN ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


accommodation in the most convenient manner, and if no extra 
expenditure of money and thought were made for the sake of an 
artistic look or a symbolic expression, these buildings could not be 
designated as objects of real architecture, Indian or foreign. The 
artistic design and symbolic significance are not confined, it should 
be noted, to the external look alone. 

The essence of architecture proper, however, lies in the ‘ fine art 
of designing and constructing ornamental buildings,’ both externally 
and internally. The mere engineering buildings are not necessarily 
devoid of all ornaments and do not always look like godowns. However 
plain a builder may be, he is instinctively artistic in nature, and what- 
ever is built by him must have some sort of art in it. But the real 
difference lies in the fact that, in architectural buildings like the 
Christian churches and the Hindu temples, the primary object is to 
exhibit an artistic design and a symbolic idea throughout ; while in 
office buildings, railway station structures, and godowns, the engineer- 
ing skill lies in providing required accommodation and facilities at 
the minimum cost. The question of utility is neither entirely ignored 
in temples, churches and mosques ; nor are the beautifying measure, 
proportion, roof, ceiling, door, window, balcony, verandah, arch, 
porch, pillars and their mouldings deliberately turned out of the 
prison houses and barracks. 

Architecture, thus comprehended, denotes all objects that are 
constructed according to a design and with an artistic finish. The 
guide book, like that of the Roman architect Vitruvius, upon which 
all western architecture is based, and the standard Silpa-Sastra, 
like the Manasdra, which has regulated all the known structures 
of India, have included sculptures also for discussion. Both these 
authorities deal almost equally with all details of the village-scheme, 
town-planning, fortified cities, and all the cognate subjects, such 
as the layout of roads, gardens, market-places, commercial ports 
and harbours, bridges, gateways, triumphal arches, enclosures, 
embankments, dams, railings, landing places, and flights of steps 
for hills and rivers, wells, tanks, trenches, drains. sewers, moats 
and similar objects. Buildings proper include religious, residential, 
military and commercial structures, and comprise temples, 
dwelling-houses, palaces, edifices and mansions, various halls and 
pavilions, secretariats, prison houses, hospitals for men, stables of 
animals, and nests for birds. Courts, compounds, blocks of larger 


410 


INDIA AND ABROAD MERGING CAPACITY OF INDIAN 
ARCHITECTURE 


edifices, as well as the auxiliary members and their component 
mouldings, are necessarily discussed. Doors, windows, verandahs and 
balconies, floors, roofs, domes, ceilings, pillars, arches and porches, 
which mostly constitute the distinguishing features of various styles 
in architecture, are elaborated in great detaiJ. Articles of furniture 
are similarly treated, and include bedsteads, couches, tables, chairs, 
wardrobes, baskets, cages, nests, mills, lamps and lamp-posts. Thrones 
and crowns for deities and kings form a distinct branch. Personal 
ornaments and garments include various chains, ear-rings, armlets, 
anklets, foot-rings, waist-bands, jackets, headgear and footwear. 

Thus architecture is, no doubt, at the root of some allied fine arts. 
But it can hardly be called the mother of mimicry, or jugglery, for 
instance. In fact, out of the five hundred and eighteen fine arts 
referred to above, hardly a dozen or score can at all be connected 
with architecture even as a sister, not to speak of as the mother.* 

Before the next point is taken into consideration, the term ‘ Indian 
architecture’ needs elucidation. Geographically, structures of what- 
ever origin and style built anywhere and at any time in India, may 
bear the designation. Like modern scientific inventions, such as 
telegraphy, radio, gramophone, etc., architectural ornaments and 
styles of pillars, arches, domes, etc., migrate all over the civilized 
world. Thus structures with some distinguishing features of various 
European, Byzantine, Persian, and Mogul styles may be visible in 
India. They are not, however, usually designated as works of Indian 
architecture, which is generally understood in the restricted sense 
of Hindu architecture only. 

If taken in this sense, the buildings and plans of towns opened 
out at Mohenjo-daro in Sindh and Harapp1 in the Punjab, which 
may go back to 3000 B.c. or even earlier, cannot yet be classified 
properly under Hindu architecture of later centuries until at least the 
scripts, the language, and the contents of the inscriptions have been 
deciphered, although, as stated above, the general plans and designs 
may bear a comparison with those described in the Manasara.° 

The next source of information for the antiquity of Indian or Hindu 
architecture is entirely literary and is confined to the casual and 
scanty references found in the Vedic literature regarding the 
villages, towns, forts, and cities, hundred enclosures or fortifica- 
tions figuratively expressed as the means for protection afforded 


1 See above, pp. 5-19. 2 See above, pp. 35-37. 
All 


fUTURE OF INDIAN ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


by the gods, as well as stone-houses, carved stones, and brick 
edifices, and several articles of furniture.1 In the Rig-veda, as 
quoted in Chapter II, mention is made of a sovereign ‘ who sits 
down in his substantial and elegant hall built with a thousand 
pillars,’ and of residential houses with such pillars and said to be 
‘ vast, comprehensive and thousand-doored.’ Mitra and Varuna are 
represented” as occupying a ‘ great palace with a thousand pillars 
and ‘a thousand gates.’ Again Atri is stated? to have been ‘ thrown 
into a machine room with a hundred doors, where he was roasted,’ 
and Vasishtha desired* to have a .three-storeyed building. 

Although Muir criticizes> these references ‘as exaggerated des- 
cription of a royal residence such as the poet had seen,’ they may 
be taken to support the contention of ‘ wonderfully magnificent 
structures going back to over 2000 years B.c.’ It can also be 
admitted that architecture, like carpentry, weaving, and such other 
practical arts, was ‘carried from generation to generation as a 
caste-craft,’ when so many other professions used to be associated 
with one’s birth. But such a condition of an art as disclosed 
by mere casual literary reference without any architectural details 
does not necessarily imply its merging capacity, which is really 
ensured by a settled, strong and ‘profoundly’ international 
government. The stale controversy, first between Fergusson and 
Rajendralal Mitra, and, subsequently, between Spooner and many 
modern scholars, has already been set at rest by tbe later 
archaeological finds and the discovery of architectural texts. No 
useful purpose will be served by re-examining the arguments so 
convincingly interpreted to explode the theory that whatever truly 
scientific and artistic architectural objects have been found in India 
must have been borrowed from abroad, though that source was 
unknown and unknowable. Hindu architecture does not seem to 
possess that capacity to merge in its fold whatever was introduced 
into India by the Persians in 500 B.c., and by the Turks, Moguls, 
and Pathans from A.D. 1000. 

So far as the Persian architecture in Persia is concerned it is necessary 
to observe, as pointed out before, that not a single monument of 
recognizable condition was ever seen by even the earliest historians, 

1 See above, pp. 54-64. 


2 Rig-veda, I, 41,5; V, 62,6; Atharva-veda, III, 12; IX, 3. 
3 [bid., I, 112, 7. 4 Wilson’s IV, 200. 5 Sanskrit Text, V, 455. 


412 


INDIA AND ABROAD MERGING CAPACITY OF INDIAN 
ARCHITECTURE 


although some objects have been cleverly restored from scanty materials 
and fertile imagination. It has been shewn in detail in Appendix I, 
quoting from Herodotus (I, 121), that the Persian had ‘ neither 
images, nor temples, nor altars,’ There is in India nothing like the 
Persian tombs divided into three portions of almost equal size. The 
middle and longer compartment, in conjunction with the other two, 
forms what is called the Greek cross. It is carved architecturally 
into four engaged columns and a lofty double-recessed doorway, 
surmounted by an Egyptian gorge and a row of dentels, so as 
to reproduce a palace facade. The upper portion of this doorway 
is solid rock, but the lower section is cut away to provide an entrance 
to the vault excavated in the mass behind. Upon a stage the king is 
seen on a pedestal. Between the king and the altar floats the image 
of Ahura-Mazda, borne on huge wings, behind which a solar disc 
is roughly suggested. The Indian stitpas, chaityas and dagobas are 
entirely different monuments in appearance, measurement, and 
architectural details. The atesh-gah, having no affinity to a Hindu 
Buddhist, or Jain temple, is ‘ the sole monumental type and repre- 
sentative of religious architecture in Persia.’ This consists of ‘ three 
altars, with very salient horns, which rise upon a block of masonry ; 
between the pillars at the angle, two parallel flights approach 
laterally the landing place that led to the platform.’ The remains of the 
plans of villages, cities, and forts are also scanty. ‘ When Alexander 
invaded the country of Persia there were no walled cities.’ ‘The 
fortification works consisted of a deep broad ditch, full of water, 
communicating with the Shaur and a double rampart. Behind the 
second rampart rana path. ... The enceinte was not furnished with 
bastions. . . . Towers had been distributed at the crenelated summits 
of the fortress.’ This would look like the scheme adopted at Babylonia 
and Assyria, rather than in India. Of the civil architecture in Persia 
fragmentary information of certain unstoreyed halls and palaces only 
are available. They are divided, as stated before, into three types, the 
open-roofed, the walled throne-room, and inhabited palace. They 
were in capital cities, Ecbatana, Susa, Persepolis, and in lesser centres 
where the kings stopped a few days to escape from the extreme cold 
and heat. The restored Persian palaces and the halls, open, walled, 
pillared, or unstoreyed, have no substantial resemblance with the 
Indian buildings of the same types which have been referred to in the 
Vedic literature long before the Persian period. The contemporary 


413 


and 


FUTURE OF INDIAN ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


Indian buildings of the Persian period comprise the cities described 
in the Rdmdyana, the numerous halls referred to in the Afaha- 
bharata, and the vthdra (monastery), ardhayoga (bungalow type of 
old Bengal buildings), prasdda (storeyed palaces), harmya (storeyed 
mansions comprising several rows or blocks), and guhd (cave- 
houses) which have been described in the Buddhist Vinaya text.1 
These buildings do not look like the Persian structures referred 
to above. The later Indian works of architecture, comprising 
villages, towns, forts, civil, military, and religious buildings, various 
articles of furniture and personal ornaments, including royal and 
divine crowns, etc., described in detail in our architectural texts, 
like the standard work Mdnasdra, and referred to above, do not 
bear any resemblance to the scanty materials and the reconstructed 
monuments of Persia. Thus there appears to be no similarity 
between Persia and India in works of architecture proper. There 
is, however, a sort of similarity between a certain type of capitals 
of columns, bearing only the unicorn and bull in Persia, but with a 
larger variety of animals in India, including the lion and elephant, as 
well as man. 

If Indian architecture had much merging capacity, the Muham- 
madan mosque would have borne the Hindu Sikhara, and the Taj 
Mahal would have looked like a dagoba. ‘ The culture and art they 
brought could have been merged into Indian one only to cause 
it to seek out a new path of development,’ if there were any 
noticeable modification of the Turkish and Mogul architecture in 
India for the better than it was in the lands of its origin. 

The layout of existing villages and towns, and the orientation and 
the arrangement of dwelling-houses therein, would supply ample 
proof to hold the view that there was a deliberate policy of the 
Muslim invaders and conquerors of India to impose their own methods 
and principles of architecture in India. Thus, in the layout of villages 
and towns and in the orientation of still existing houses, the scientific 
principles of Hindu architecture, though more suitable for the soil 
and climate, are missing. ‘ A casual inspection of houses in cities of 
Bengal, Madras, Bombay, the Punjab, the United Provinces, and 
Bihar and Orissa may supply many convincing illustrations. Not only 
certain quarters of Lahore, Delhi, Meerut, Lucknow, Benares, Patna, 


1 Mahavagga, I, 30 4; Chullavagga, VI, 1, 2. 
414 


INDIA AND ABROAD FOREIGN ELEMENTS IN INDIAN 
ARCHITECTURE 


and Calcutta are named after the Pathans and the Moguls, but 
there are actually houses with the characteristic features of Arabian 
deserts and colder regions wherefrom the Moguls emerged.’ These 
works of foreign architecture, unsuitable for the Indian climate and 
soil, have been rendered possible largely for political reasons. This 
is mostly due to the natural desire of the conquerors firmly to establish 
their domination and culture by removing the customs, habits, and 
traditions of the conquered as far as possible ; and, partly, on account 
of the ignorance of the scientific methods of Indian architecture or 
a dislike to apply them in preference to their own. Thus, in muslimized 
structures in India are seen in abundance the Saracenic domes and 
arches introduced by the Muhammadans of Syria and Palestine, 
known as the Arab-Berber races of Northern Africa, who conquered 
Spain and Sicily and invaded France. In fact this style has materially 
affected the Hindu style in the layout of villages, towns, ferts, as well 
as in civil buildings, instead of its being merged into the Hindu one. 
Byzantine architecture, introduced by the Turks of Byzantium, or 
Constantinople, and prevalent in the Eastern empire down to 1453, 
appears almost to have migrated to India, materially dispossessing 
the Hindu style. It is ‘marked by the round arch springing from 
columns or piers, the dome supported upon pendentines, capitals 
elaborately sculptured, mosaic or other incrustations, etc.,’ which 
are largely visible in Hindu buildings of the Muslim period in India. 
These features are visible not only in domestic structures of the 
Hindus, but they have also penetrated into some of the Hindu, 
Buddhist, and Jain temples of the period, belonging to western, 
northern, and eastern India, where the architectural traditions of the 
Hindus were entirely forgotten. 

Thus the advent of the English in the eighteenth century could 
not destroy ‘the Indian domestic and religious architecture,’ even 
if they wanted to, because the domestic Hindu architecture of that 
time had already become largely muslimized. So far as Indian 
religious architecture, or the Hindu, Buddhist, and Jain temples, 
and monuments of Muslim origin are concerned, no traces thereof 
would have been found by this time if the British conquerors, 
instead of neglecting, not to speak of destroying, had not made 
an active effort to preserve them. The Preservation of Ancient 
Monuments Act of 1904, initiated by an Englishman, Lord 
Curzon, may be cited as an undisputed evidence. This fact 


415 


FUTURE OF INDIAN ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


will contrast well with the similarly undisputed marks of deliberate 
destruction of Hindu monuments in several places in western, 
northern, eastern, and central India. Many readers may have seen 
the condition of Somanath temple in Gujarat, the back pertion of 
the original temple of Visvanath at Benares (the front portion 
whereof has been merged into a mosque), the chisel marks of 
destruction to remove the nose, nipple, and other pointed portions 
of sculptures at Ajanta, Ellora, and a hundred other places. Readers 
of history and Hindu culture, and of the Sanskrit, Pali, and Prakrit 
texts, are well aware that there would have been no traces of the 
manuscripts of the Vedas, the Buddhist and the Jain scriptures and 
canonical works, if, at the instance of the Indo-British Government, the 
early English, French, and German savants had not toiled, not only 
to preserve and publish them, but also to encourage and induce us 
to appreciate them. It was left for Sir Aurel Stein to discover and 
join together the full manuscripts of the Kashmir history, Rdja-tarangini, 
f:om the three co-sharers of a Pandit in Kashmir, who had cut, 
breadthwise, the book of those manuscripts, written lengthwise on palm 
leaves, into three equal portions, along with other ancestral property. 
It was Béhtlingk and Roth who compiled the St. Petersburg Diction- 
ary, of which Sir Monier William’s and Apte’s Sanskrit-English 
Dictionaries are but summaries, that have made the study of 
Sanskrit popular among most of the Indians themselves. The compiler 
of the Pali Dictionary was Childers, an Englishman. The writers 
of the histories of Indian literature are all Europeans. A retired 
British army officer, General Sir A. Cunningham, organized the 
archaeological researches in India, which alone rendered it possible 
to make excavations at many places like Harappa and Mohenjo- 
daro, the treasures whereof have supplied materials to the un- 
generous critic to refer to the antiquity of Hindu architecture. It 
was again the English who established research centres like the 
Asiatic Society in India and abroad, the modern schools, colleges, 
and universities, and introduced the system of sending abroad Indian 
students for special training in cultural, scientific, and technical 
subjects, including engineering and architecture. 

The object here is not to recount the blessings following from 
the ‘ advent of the English,’ nor to make a contrast between different 
conquerors of India in their destructive and constructive efforts 
or in matters of modification, preservation, and reconstruction. The 

416 


INDIA AND ABROAD AUTHENTICATED SOURCES OF 

INDIAN ARCHITECTURE 
critic will be justified in accusing the English people, or the British 
Government in India, that they have not done all that they could 
do for us. But it will be untrue and incorrect to say that the ‘ advent 
of the English’ has destroyed ‘the Indian domestic and religious 
architecture.’ 

Who is responsible for the ‘ craze for new things from the West’ 
which ‘ was going to convert British India into a province of Europe 
in matters of architecture and art,’ if the statement is at all correct 
in some modified form? ‘ Craze’ is certainly a subjective quality, 
and the desire to imitate the conquerors, whether Muslim, English or, 
French, is a historical fact and a usual weakness of all the conquered 
and subjugated peoples of the world. The British Government in 
India have no more compelled us than the earlier conquerors to 
take to their mode of living. If certain quarters of some big cities 
in British India have been turned into a ‘ province of Europe in 
matter of architecture, ’ and if certain so-called highly placed Indian 
families have developed a preference for European art, our own 
‘craze’ for blind imitation is solely responsible for that. 

The following complaint contained in the same document is 
substantially true, though incomplete : 

‘There is no institution in modern India where Indian youths 
can get proper training, either theoretical or practical, in the com- 
plex subject of Indian architecture. The very descendants of tradi- 
tional architects and craftsmen, not to speak of the civil engineers 
trained in modern engincering institutions, owing to their deplorable 
ignorance of the history and spirit of Indian architecture due to lack 
of proper education, have failed to develop their indigenous archi- 
tecture and have introduced ugly and hybrid styles, unfaithful to 
Indian traditions.’ 

The aesthetic sense of individuals differs, though in architecture 
there is a general standard of beauty. According to the standard 
treatises of Europe and of India the architectural beauty is largely 
dependent upon proportionate measurement of dimensions, dis- 
position of component members and types of verandahs, balconies, 
doors, windows, atches, porches, parapets and domes. The aspect 
of the site and orientation of the buildings, together with the layout 
of surrounding courtyards, lawns and gardens, add to the beauty 


and utility alike. 
417 


FUTURE OF INDIAN ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


The incompleteness of the complaint lies in the omission of the 
authority and authenticity of the source of information on these 
essential features of Indian architecture. It is again due to the British 
Government in India and the highly placed English officials, un- 
generously and falsely accused of having destroyed Indian architec- 
ture, who have made available the archaeological materials and 
the original texts on architecture, the most authenticated sources 
of information on all architectural and allied subjects for critical 
study and reconstruction of our forgotten architecture and cognate 
arts. The establishment of the Archaeological Department itself is 
an innovation in India. The Bill introduced in the Assembly by an 
English Home Member, Sir Basil Blackett, to establish a permanent 
fund to carry on the work of the Archaeological Department could 
not be passed owing to the opposition of our own representatives. 
Under such adverse circumstances the distinguished Director General 
of Archaeology, Sir John Marshall, again an Englishman, a real scholar 
and lover of Indian culture, was thé first and foremost to realize that 
no reconstruction of real Indian architecture is possible from the 
scanty archaeological remains, and that it could be done only with 
the assistance to be derived from the literary sources and numerous 
architectural texts if they could be scientifically edited, translated and 
illustrated. The architectural tradition, as truly said, has been lost. 
The professional craftsmen have all but disappeared. The terms of 
the Silpa-Sdstras, frequently referred to in the scriptures, Purdnas, 
Agamas, and all other branches of literature, had become unintel- 
ligible, obscure, and obsolete. Thus some Indian student possessing 
sufficient knowledge of our classics and several modern vernaculars, 
conversant with the principles of philology, and thoroughly educated 
in Indian history, culture, and archaeology had to be found, 
after much searching, for special training and experience abroad 
to tackle these valuable treasures, left so far unrecognized, neglected, 
and unutilized. The result has been the publication by the Govern- 
ment of the United Provinces, with the substantial assistance rendered 
by the Secretary of State for India and the Government of India, 
through the Oxford University Press, of seven volumes, covering some 
5,000 quarto pages, dealing with the whole subject thoroughly 
and in a scientific manner. They comprise not only the standard 
text—the Mdnasdra—its translation into English, and illustrations of 
architectural and sculptural objects described therein, but also an 


418 


INDIA AND ABROAD ADAPTABILITY OF INDIAN 

ARCHITECTURE 
Encyclopaedia of Hindu Architecture which will enable students, 
builders, engineers, and architects to study the original texts and 
the archaeological records that are gathered together therein, accord- 
ing to their own light, and, an introductory volume dealing with a 
historical survey of all architectural evidences of the past and finally 
the present volume, which will enable all unprejudiced readers to 
form a true perspective and which may remove ignorance and 
false notions from the mind of the professional misleaders. 

A careful study of these volumes is indispensable in order to under- 
stand fully the methods and principles, rules and regulations, as well 
as the essential features of real Indian architecture. For without 
full and accurate knowledge the adaptability of Hindu architecture 
to modern conditions and requirements will either be lost sight of, 
or an ugly hybrid mixture will be inevitable. 

A rigorous purity of style need not be strictly adhered to for practical 
or asthetic reasons. Such a conservative spirit may only gratify a 
profoundly national bigot. It cannot enhance the real importance 
of a great national art. Even to preserve artistic design and symbolic 
significance it will not be a practical proposition to lose sight of 
the adaptability of Hindu architecture for modern requirements. 
For neither the aspect of the existing towns and villages which 
have been haphazardly laid out, owing to political reasons, nor 
the external orientation and internal disposition of dwelling-houses 
erected unscientifically, owing to social and economic conditions, 
can be materially altered unless a catastrophe like an earthquake 
occurs frequently. Both commonsense and the ancient authorities, 
however, emphasize the aspect of sites and the orientation of buildings 
as the most essential factors in architecture. Provided the scientific 
calculation of strength and harmony and proportion of the com- 
ponent and auxiliary members, on which both stability and beauty 
depend, be maintained, there can be no harm if there be a modifica- 
tion by addition, omission, or alteration of the pillars and pilasters, 
doors and windows, arches and porches, balconies and verandahs, 
steps and staircases, parapets and crowning domes in order to suit 
different tastes and purses. Mouldings and ornamental sculptures are 
objects of individual taste and can be altered if the modification does 

ad to incongruity. eb Sth? and 
give es a that has disfigured the residential buildings in 
the Lake area in Calcutta, decorated with ornaments and sculptures 


419 


FUTURE OF INDIAN ARCHITECTURE HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


borrowed from Ajanta and Ellora caves. It is objectionable on this 
ground, more than anything else, to build residential houses with 
the figure of GaneSa on the gateway or an elephant on the landing, 
a hospital building with a hawk on the front parapet or a school 
building with a monkey on the top, intending them to pass as 
productions of Hindu architecture in order to gratify the heart’s 
craving of the enthusiastic builders for an Indian style. Self-deception 
is preferable to deliberate cheating, even if the latter is practised 
owing to ignorance. Some builders are natural architects, and they 
prefer their own design based entirely on the inspiration of an un- 
educated mind. Engineers and architects are not to blame for such 
architecture, which is very common in India. There can be no 
objection if a layman builder, though untrained, having studied or 
seen the objects of architecture in different countries, makes a choice 
or combination of styles in his own building in a place where there 
is no municipal board to sanction the plan. But it will be unfortunate 
if some innocent business magnate of Calcutta or Bombay finds, on 
completion of his house, that he was misled to believe by his advisers 
that his proposed residence will prove to be a fine piece of original 
architecture, though it may not follow any one method or principle 
and though it may consist of a porch from one country, a dome from 
another, office room and library from a third one, kitchen and dining- 
room from another country, and gardens and outhouses from a fifth 
place. Still more objectionable, even on moral grounds, would it be 
to cheat an enthusiastic builder that the Hindu style is nothing more 
or less than the monkey brand; or to give a misdirection to a pro- 
foundly nationalistic municipal corporation that the cause of the 
national architecture could be advanced only by discarding all that 
may look like English in the city plan, in laying out roads, and in 
sanctioning permission to independent private builders within their 
jurisdiction. 

Insufficient and inaccurate knowledge, and an unjustifiable 
prejudice against everything English, appear to be at the root of the 
following quotation from the ‘Prospectus of the first All-India 
Exhibition of Indian Architecture,’ held in the Senate House of the 
University of Calcutta. ‘By modern Indian architecture is meant 
the development of old Indian styles of architecture,’ which is 
elucidated by expressly excluding all structures built after the British 
pattern by saying, ‘ that existed in India before the termination of 


420 


INDIA AND ABROAD ADAPTABILITY OF INDIAN 
ARCHITECTURE 


the Mogul rule, but adopted to suit modern Indian requirements, 
viz., sanitation, economy, utility, etc.’ 

It is needless to repeat what has been shown above, that nothing 
much of real Hindu village, town, or dwelling-house remained intact 
before the termination of the Mogul rule. All that survived comprise 
a few temples of later dates in the South, where the Muslim domina- 
tion did not spread far and wide. Even in the South the civil 
architecture has been modified to suit the needs of villagers, who 
became largely converted to Christianity more through non-British 
agencies of other European conquerors. Thus, before the termination 
of the Mogul rule, what remained of civil architecture was exclusively 
of Muhammadan origin. If, therefore, in order to modernize Indian 
architecture, the British patterns are to be excluded, it will be 
necessary to demolish and rebuild not only the Viceregal palace at 
New Delhi and all the Council halls, secretariat buildings and offices 
in central and provincial towns, but also the bridges, railways, 
schools, colleges, universities,, art galleries, museums, hospitals, 
maternity homes, down to the prison houses and lunatic asylums. 
Will the reform, if at all possible from the scanty materials of such 
structures that can be reconstructed from the Persian, Turkish, 
Pathan and Mogul patterns alone, the knowledge of the Hindu source 
being absent, satisfy our sanitary, economic, and utilitarian require- 
ments ? 

All interested in the revival of an Indian architecture must learn 
to distinguish its essential features from the unessential ones. And 
they must know what can be absorbed for our own advantage from 
not only the Muslim and the British styles but also from all the known 
and scientific methods that the civilized peoples of the world have 
evolved after long experience and repeated experiments. For, other- 
wise, India cannot expect to be modernized in architecture. 


421 


APPENDIX IIT 


WHAT OTHERS THINK 


OBSERVATIONS ON MANASARA ARCHITECTURE 


Dr. RABINDRANATH TAGORE! 


ORDINARILY RESEARCH SCHOLARS seem to ignore the fact that the 
past is of interest to us only in so far as it was living, and that, unless 
they discover it for us in such a way as to make us feel its life, we 
may admire them for their patience and industry, but will not be the 
wiser for their labours. I have often felt sad that so much human 
talent and industry should disappear in the publication of matter 
where bones keep on rattling without forming for us an outline of 
the figure that once moved. I, therefore, cannot help congratulating 
Dr. P. K. Acharya of the Allahabad University for his great work 
Manasara. I am not qualified to pronounce judgment on ancient 
Indian architecture, but I can say this much that the learned author 
has succeeded in re-fashioning for us, out of the debris of the past, 
a picture of the forms of ancient architecture which, while it speaks 
much for his scholarly equipment, has the additional merit of interest- 
ing us in a real human way. The indirect glimpses it gives into the 
life of the people whose architecture he discusses are something for 
which his readers will have reasons to be grateful to him. 


Dr, C, Y. CHINTAMANI, D.LITT., D.L., EDITOR OF THE LEADER? 


Dr. P. K. Acharya, Professor of Sanskrit, University of Allahabad, 
deserves high praise and warm congratulations on producing, as the 
result of seventeen years of devoted and self-denying effort, a truly 
monumental work on Hindu architecture, comprising no fewer than 
five volumes. The first volume is A Dictionary of Hindu Architecture ; the 


1 The Visva Bharati Quarterly, May—July, 1935; Pe 115. 
2 The Leader, 6th August, 1933. 


422 


INDIA AND ABROAD OBSERVATIONS ON MANASARA 


ARCHITECTURE 
second, Indian Architecture according to Manasdra Silpa-Sastra ; the third, 
Manasara—Sanskrit Text with Critical Notes ; the fourth, Architecture 
of Ménasara—translation in English, and the fifth, Architecture of 
Manasdra—Plates 1 to oxxxv (Architectural) and cxxxvm to cLvu 
(Sculptural). 

Dr. Acharya is richly qualified for the laborious task which he 
undertook in a spirit of dedication. He is an M.A. of Calcutta, a 
Ph. D. of Leyden, and Doctor in Literature of London. He is a 
member of the Indian Educational Service whose services were lent 
to the University of Allahabad for engagement as Professor of Sanskrit. 
He has so won the regard and confidence of his colleagues of the 
University that he has for years been the Head of the Oriental Depart- 
ments and also Dean of the Faculty of Arts. To his students he 
has been remarkably considerate and helpful, and, without sacri- 
ficing the demands of discipline and efficiency, has made himself 
deservedly popular among them., 

For the production of the big work under notice, Dr. Acharya 
spared no pains whatsoever. He has discovered unknown ways 
and learnt new things ‘after bitter experience and elaborate 
experiments.’ 

‘The vast store of literature on the subject, and the inscriptions 
and other archaeological records have had to be ransacked. Extensive 
tours in company with trained architects and engineers have had 
to be undertaken, involving great expenditure of time, money, and 
convenience, from Landikotal on the borders of Afghanistan to 
Ramesvaram in the south, from Mohenjodaro in Sindh to Shillong 
in Assam, in order to examine ancient monuments throughout the 
country, including the cave-temples of Western and Central India, 
the monuments of the Indian States in Rajputana and Hyderabad, 
the hill temples of Kedarnath, Badrinath, Tunganath, etc. An en- 
cyclopaedic dictionary has had to be compiled wherein, for the first 
time, an attempt has been made to settle the meaning of, and explain 
in English, some three thousand technical terms by illustrative 
quotations from cognate literature. In addition, some two hundred 
measured drawings, diagrams, and sketches in line and in colours 
have had to be prepared at great trouble and expense.’ 

‘ Thus,’ says Dr. Acharya, ‘ the peculiar pain of giving “ rebirth i 
to a once fully-grown “ barbarous ” child of unknown origin has been 
brought home to the writer. The youthful enthusiasm has been put 


423 


= 


WHAT OTHERS THINK HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


to a great trial through the continuous struggle for seventeen years. 
With great diffidence, therefore, this curious child is presented to 
the learned world. If received with sympathy and kindness even 
such a child may thrive and bring some solace to everybody respon- 
sible for and interested in it.’ Dr. Acharya’s diffidence does credit 
to his modesty. His work is the product of such uncommon scholastic 
zeal and enthusiasm, and of such rare merit that, we are quite sure, 
the learned author’s sacrifice will be rewarded not merely by the 
appreciation of competent judges, but by ‘lasting benefit’ to the 
country. Dr. Acharya is right to hold that ‘ our architectural policy 
of the past few hundred years, based as it has been on foreign imita- 
tion, and in an entirely different climate and soil, has not proved 
quite successful in regard to temples and humble dwelling-houses, 
if not in regard to public edifices also.” We earnestly share 
Dr. Acharya’s hope. To the layman, quite a new world, as it were, 
of India’s greatness in a sphere of national life which has been com- 
paratively neglected, is opened by our author’s magnum opus. As 
we read Dr. Acharya’s pages we are filled with wonder, admiration, 
and pride that the twin subjects of architecture and sculpture were 
treated with such scientific thoroughness and precision by our remote 
ancestors. And yet, we are the people who are condemned, by the 
arrogance of a ruling race, as unworthy of constructing the ugly 
barracks which our Public Works Department glories in putting up 
at extravagant cost to the tax-payer. 

In undertaking and executing the present work, Dr. Acharya 
has had to combine in himself the triple office of editor, translator, 
and commentator; and he has wisely followed the sound rule: 
“let an editor give what there is, and let the commentator say what 
might be and what ought to be.’ Dr. Acharya placed before himself 
the following dictum for his guidance: ‘ What the learned world 
demand of us in India is to be quite certain of our data, to place 
the monumental record before them exactly as it now exists, and 
to interpret it faithfully and literally.? This he has successfully 
followed. 

The seventy chapters (of the Manasara) deal with such varied subjects 
as the qualifications of architects, the selection of sites, the examina- 
tion of soil, site-plans, the village, town-planning, forts, the dimensions 
of buildings, the bases and pedestals of columns, the features of 
buildings (one-storeyed to twelve-storeyed), courts, temples, pavilions, 


424 


INDIA AND ABROAD OBSERVATIONS ON MANASARA 
ARCHITECTURE 


mansions, dwelling-houses, royal palaces, bedsteads and swings, 
thrones, arches, theatres, ornamental trees, crowns, altars, personal 
ornaments, furniture, various kinds of images and penalties for 
defective construction. No wonder that the author thinks that, 
like the medical works, this is ‘ the most practical of Sanskrit treatises.’ 
He re-affirms ‘the hope that a trial may be given to its methods 
and principles, its rules and regulations, because the foreign 
imitation in architecture for a millennium has proved more or less 
unsuccessful and uneconomical.’ 

It is encouraging and pleasing to find that Dr. Acharya’s great 
effort has won commendation from such men as Dr. Keith, Mr. Havell, 
Dr. Abanindra Nath Tagore, Dr. A. K. Coormaraswamy, Dr. Ganga- 
natha Jha, Prof. Thomas, Sir Claude de la Fosse, Dr. Sten Knonow, 
Mr. K. N. Dikshit, Dr. Kali Das Nag, and several antiquarian journals. 
We may be permitted to quote, as typical of opinion generally, the 
following passage from Dr. Coomaraswamy’s learned review in the 
Journal of the American Oriental Society : 

‘ These two volumes, the latter (Dictionary) especially, are monu- 
mental works, and will be indispensable to every student of Indian 
architecture and realia. Only those who work along these lines 
will realize the great labour involved in the preparation of such 
books, especially when they are almost the first of their kind. The 
serious study of the Indian Silpa-sastra has been too long delayed, 
and a warm welcome may be extended to the Professor’s under- 
taking.’ 

One last word. It is a pleasure for us to be able to acknowledge 
the uniform and ungrudging encouragement and assistance which 
the Government of the United Provinces, the Government of India, 
and other governments and a number of high-placed officials gave to 
Dr. Acharya to enable him to continue and complete his most 
admirable work. We once more congratulate the learned author. 


Proressor A. BERRIEDALE KEITH, D.G.L., D.LITT.! 


Professor Prasanna Kumar Acharya has now completed his study 
of Hindu Achitecture by adding to his Dictionary of Hindu Architecture 
and Indian Architecture according to Manasara Silpa-Sastra, the Sanskrit 
text of the Manasdra, edited with critical notes, a translation in English 


1The Modern Review, Calcutta, January, 1936. 
425 


WHAT OTHERS THINK HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


of the Architecture of Mdanasdra, and a collection of 157 illustrated 
plates in line and colour. 

Full recognition has already been accorded by all students of 
Indian Art and Science to the fundamental value of Professor Acharya’s 
earlier contributions to the elucidation of the Sanskrit texts on archi- 
tecture, and the invaluable character of his Dictionary is admitted 
on all hands. The three new volumes which are now available form 
an indispensable part of his undertaking. They present the material 
on which the results stated in his earlier works were based, and they 
afford the means for further investigation into the many obscure 
issues which still remain to be solved. It is almost impossible to 
exaggerate the difficulties of producing a satisfactory text of such a 
work as the Manasara. It has been necessary to prepare the edition 
from eleven- manuscripts, not one of which presents a readable or 
trustworthy text. It is clear, however, that, even if we had much 
older manuscripts than those which have been preserved, we would 
still find a text written in very defective Sanskrit. It is plain that the 
writers on technical science, whether medicine, or mathematics, 
or architecture, were far from being proficient in Sanskrit, and, after 
making all those conjectures which the state of the manuscripts 
renders legitimate, we are left with a text which, in many places, 
not merely violates the rules of Sanskrit grammar, but offers the 
most serious difficulty of translation. The editor has most wisely 
shown the utmost caution in his reconstruction of the text. He has 
made such amendments only as are indispensable for the consti- 
tution of an intelligible text ; he has marked these clearly in the text 
itself and he has given in full all real various readings in his author- 
ities. It is most improbable that any manuscripts will ever come to 
light which will enable us substantially to improve the style of the 
M Gnasara. 

The translation of a work of this type presents endless difficulties, 
and the utmost credit is due to the author for the energy with which 
he has reckoned with the problems presented by the text. Even the 
most cursory examination shows how impossible it is without the 
aid of the translation and the explanations given in the Dictionary 
to understand with any precision the directions of the text. An 
indispensab:e adjunct to the translation and the Dictionary alike 
is afforded by the volume of iJlustrations of architectural and structural 
objects. It is impossible to exaggerate the importance of this feature 

4.26 


INDIA AND ABROAD OBSERVATIONS ON MANASARA 


ARCHITECTURE 

of the work. The author describes the difficulties which he experi- 
enced in obtaining the means of producing these illustrations, and 
our most grateful thanks are due to Mr. H. Hargreaves, who placed 
at the disposal of Professor Acharya the services of Mr. S. C. Mukherji, 
a graduate in Sanskrit, who had received training in the methods 
and principles of Greco-Roman and modern architecture. The 
material is now available for an investigation of the question whether 
the extant monuments of Hindu architecture are based on the methods 
and principle which are set forth in the Manasdara. It is interesting 
to note that the greatest difficulties were experienced in securing 
the services of a Silpin to supply the sculptural drawings in line and 
in colours. It is hoped that the same artist may be available to 
execute the remaining sculptural drawings, some three hundred 
in number. 

The labour involved in this great work has been lightened by the 
encouragement of many scholars, and it will be of particular interest 
to see whether his work in making available the true doctrines of the 
ancient Hindu authorities can be turned to practical benefit for 
India and for its people. The Ruler of Oundh, whose interest in 
Indian culture and art is well known from his contributions to the 
great edition of the Mahabharata, intends to build a house accord- 
ing to the directions of the Manasara, and it may well be that modern 
India has something to learn in this as in other matters from the 
achievements of its past. 


H. Harcreaves, EsQ., LATELY THE DirEcTOR GENERAL OF 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA? 


These publications are the third, fourth, and fifth volumes of an 
Encyclopaedia of Hindu Architecture of which the first two volumes—A 
Dictionary of Hindu Architecture and Indian Architecture according to the 
Manasara Silpa-Sastra—were published in 1927 and reviewed at length 
in the Journal for October, 1928. 

In the third volume, Dr. Acharya now gives the complete Sanskrit 
text (based on eleven manuscripts written in five different scripts), 
as well as 315 pages of notes in English, from which an idea may 
be obtained of the imperfect condition of the available manuscripts. 
The fourth volume is the English translation, and, considering the 


1 Fournal of the Royal Asiatic Society, London, October, 1935, pp. 777-9: 
427 


WHAT OTHERS THINK HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


material on which it is based, the author has, on the whole, been 
successful in giving an understandable and readable text, though 
naturally obscurities are not entirely absent. The suggestion that 
the usefulness of the Mdanasdra would be enhanced by illustrating it 
has been met by Dr. Acharya, who has issued the fifth volume as a 
collection of 157 plates. For the preparation of these drawings he 
has enlisted the assistance of K. S. Siddhalinga Swamy, a Silpin, 
working according to the tradition of the Silpa-Sdstras and whose 
illustrations of images and other objects are very successful, parti- 
cularly his eleven coloured plates. For the illustrations of the archi- 
tectural drawings Dr. Acharya is indebted in the main to Mr. S. CG. 
Mukherji, whose knowledge of Sanskrit and training in architecture 
has enabled him to contribute 121 line-drawings of a suggestive 
and helpful nature. None of the drawings appears to have been 
based on either ancient remains or existing structures. 

The importance of this Encyclepaedia of Hindu Architecture will 
be generally admitted, and Dr. Acharya is to be congratulated on the 
successful termination of his prolonged labours, in which he has 
displayed not only scholarship, but industry and indomitable per- 
severance. His work is, indeed, ‘not the end but the beginning of 
a new line of Indology’ and it will now be for Indian architects, 
archaeologists, and students of Indian arts and crafts to examine to 
what extent the principles laid down in the Mdnasdra represent 
those of medieval Hindu architecture and art, and to consider if 
they are suitable for modern practice, for philologists to suggest solu- 
tions of the problems revealed by the textual imperfections, and for 
Sanskrit lexicographers to avail themselves of the technical terms 
now, for the first time, made available by the complete text. 


Manamanopapuyaya Pr. GANGANATHA JHA, M.A., D.LITT., D.L.2 


These are the three concluding volumes of the monumental work 
on Manasdra, by the Allahabad Professor. The first two volumes— 
(1) A Dictionary of Indian Architecture, and (2) Indian Architecture 
according to Mdnasara Silpa-Sastra—appeared a few years ago and 
have been appreciated by the world of scholars, as evinced by the 
fact that the gifted author is already preparing a second edition. 


1 Modern Review, April, 1934. 
428 


INDIA AND ABROAD OBSERVATIONS ON MANASARA 
ARCHITECTURE 


The third volume of the series, which is no. (1) of the three volumes 
under review contains the original text of the Manasara with (a) full 
alphabetical index and (0) critical notes. The original text of the 
treatise is so notoriously and hopelessly corrupt that credit is due to 
Dr. Acharya for having provided a readable text. Anachronisms 
and grammatical anomalies in which the text abounds are the 
common feature of many Sanskrit treatises on technical subjects,— 
such as Medicine and Astronomy-Astrology. But the text of Manasara 
is full of other defects as well. It must have cost the editor immense 
labour and not a little ingenuity to prepare a neat and readable 
text. The critical notes bear ample testimony to this. 

The Jdnasdra, it seems, was not meant by the author, whoever 
he was, to be a scholarly and scientific treatise ; it appears to have 
been meant as a handbook for the guidance of practical builders 
and architects. This is the only explanation that we can find for 
the more-than-ordinary ‘barbarous Sanskrit’ in which the work 
has been described as having been written. This is also indicated 
by the fact that the author’s narne is nowhere mentioned ; and it is 
difficult to find out who the author was. Like many encyclopaedic 
works, it has been attributed by pandits to the great Scholar-King 
Bhojadeva of Dhara. 

This leads us on to the second of the three volumes under notice— 
which forms Volume IV of the series. Here, in the Preface, we are told 
in regard to the authorship of the original that, ‘up tll now, no 
tangible argument or proof has been found as to the possibility of 
the treatise being the compilation of a number of authors, instead 
of a single individual.’ There is thus a lot of uncertainty on this 
point, and the only reasonable view to take at present appears to be 
the one hinted at in this sentence. It is a practical handbook, added 
to from time to time as experience dictated. This also will account 
for the diversity of language and style. 

This volume contains a complete English translation of the original, 
with full alphabetical indices of Sanskrit and English terms. The 
translation is accurate and at the same time readable by itself, which 
cannot be said of most of our translations, which lose much of their 
readability through an attempt at literalness. Dr. Acharya has 
sailed clear of this difficulty and has succeeded in giving us a transla- 
tion which can be read and understood by itself. ; 

Some idea of the magnitude of the task to which Dr. Acharya 
set himself twenty years ago may be formed from the contents of the 


429 


WHAT OTHERS THINK HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


work, The whole work consists of seventy chapters, dealing with all 
the minute details relating to house-building, such as qualifications 
of architects, selection of site, erection of the gnomons for the orien- 
tation of buildings (a matter which is very badly understood by 
present-day builders), site-plans, village- and town- and fort-planning, 
dimensions, foundation, pedestal, columns, roofs, joinery and 
general features. All these are dealt with in relation to buildings of 
one to twelve storeys—(it seems we had sky-scrapers in ancient times). 
Next follow chapters dealing with royal palaces, royal entourage, 
cars, chariots, furniture, thrones, arches, central theatre and crowns. 
Lastly, there come temples and images, separate chapters being 
assigned to Jaina images, Buddhist images, images of sages, the 
comparative measures of images. Special chapters are also devoted 
to the casting of idols in wax and the chiselling of the eye. There are 
penalties also for defective construction. 

The last volume of the series supplies elaborate plates providing 
full illustrations (drawn to scale) of architectural and sculptural 
objects. These are likely to be extremely useful to the extensive 
town- and village-planning that is going to be undertaken in Bihar. 
It represents the practical outcome of the experience of centuries, 
and is likely to be more adapted to the climatic conditions of the 
country than the ideas derived from experience in other climes and 
other countries. 

While congratulating Dr. Acharya on the completion of his monu- 
menta] work, one cannot resist the temptation of requesting him to 
bring out, in course of the present year, if possible (in view of the 
likelihood of its being useful in the rebuilding of Bihar), a smaller 
volume containing, in brief, the main conclusions, specially those 
relating to the planning of villages and towns and the building of 
houses. ‘This volume should not contain more than 200 or 250 pages. 
The utility of the work would be immensely enhanced if a Hindi 
translation also appeared simultaneously with the English version. 


RAMANANDA CHATTERJEE, EsQ., Eprror, MoDERN Rrvirw! 


As many towns and villages in Bihar will bave to be reconstructed, 
all those who are directly and indirectly connected with the work 
of reconstruction should have their attention drawn to the ancient 

1 Modern Review, April and May, 1934. 
430 


INDIA AND ABROAD OBSERVATIONS ON MANASARA 
ARCHITECTURE 


Indian ideas of village-planning, town-planning, and architecture in 
general. They are to be found in Professor Dr. P. K. Acharya’s 
masterly edition of the ancient standard Sanskrit work Mdnasara 
in five sumptuous volumes. Those who do not know Sanskrit need 
not think that the work will not be of any use to them. For Dr. 
Acharya has given a full English translation of the work with critical 
notes. There are also numerous plates, which will help architects, 
engineers, and builders in their work. 

European architecture has not been a complete success in India 
either from the artistic or from the economic point of view. We 
should give a trial to our own architectural rules and plans, which 
were not crude but scientific. 

As the Government and non-official relief societies and the 
Maharajadhiraj of Darbhanga are going to spend lakhs of rupees, 
they would do well to spend a very much smaller sum to purchase 
copies of this work, for the preparation and publication of which the 
author has received encouragement and assistance from the Govern- 
ment of India, the Government. of the United Provinces, and other 
Governments, and some high officials. The work has been published 
by the Oxford University Press. 

It has been reported in the papers that in Nepal old temples, 
constructed according to ancient Indian methods, have not suffered 
so much from the earthquake as more modern buildings. There is 
reason to believe that buildings on the Mdnasara plans and methods 
would be durable and beautiful, as well as comparatively inexpensive. 

The patriotism of .Mahatma Gandhi, Pandit Madan Mohan 
Malaviya, Babu Rajendra Prasad, and other leaders need not be 
referred to. But it is not to their or anybody else’s patriotism that it is 
necessary to appeal. The appeal is to common sense. And the 
common-sense view is that an eJaborate and practical handbook 
of architecture, which has come down from antiquity and which 
embodies the age-long experience of many experts, native to the 
soi] and the climate, should at least be given a trial. To dismiss it 
without such trial, is to insult ourselves as well as our ancestors. Of 
course, there should be adaptations to modern conditions, wherever 
necessary. The first two volumes of this monumental work were 
published in 1927 and were highly appreciated by savants and 
artists in India and abroad. They were reviewed in our Bengali 
magazine Prabast and in the Modern Review. 


431 


WHAT OTHERS THINK HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


Manasara is universally recognized as the standard Hindu treatise 
on Hindu architecture. But it has not hitherto been completely 
published after critical editing, nor comprehensively treated other- 
wise. A complete translation into English was also wanting. Its 
technical terms and ‘barbarous’ Sanskrit presented difficulties 
even to professional Indologists. Dr. Acharya has, after years of 
devoted lJabour, succeeded in overcoming these difficulties to a 
sufficient extent to be able to finish his work and thus to open up a 
new line of research. Scholars and the general public will be thankful 
to him for this service. There has been for some time a disposition on 
the part of a section at least of the Indian public to favour Indian 
architecture. But there has not been much definite and scientific 
knowledge of what that architecture stood for. Dr. Acharya’s work 
will enlighten architects, engineers and craftsmen. 


FREDERICK GruBB, Esq.1 


Dr. Prasanna Kumar Acharya, i.z.s., Professor of Sanskrit in the 
University of Allahabad, has placed all scholars and researchers 
who are interested in Indian archaeology under a great obligation 
by the completion and publication of his monumental work on the 
Manasara architecture. Under instructions from the Government 
of the United Provinces the same author compiled some years ago 
A Dictionary of Hindu Architecture, together with a second volume 
on the same subject according to Manasara Silpa-Sastra. Dictionaries 
available previous to that date, whether in Sanskrit, English or any 
other language, did not adequately explain the architectural terms 
of a remote past. For hundreds of years the texts of the Vastu- 
Sastras had remained unexplored, waiting for someone possessed of 
the necessary erudition and industry to provide students with a 
dictionary which should enable them to make effective use of these 
unique manuscripts. 

Since then Dr. Acharya has devoted a great deal of his time to the 
preparation of the three supplementary volumes recently published 
by the Oxford University Press. 

The work as a whole comprises a comprehensive encyclopaedia 
of what to most people must be a rather abstruse subject. It includes — 

(1) Hindu (Educational and Literary Supplement), 17th July, 1934. (2) 


Tribune, 20th July, 1934. (3) Leader, 23rd August. (4) Hindustan Times, 3rd 
September, 1934. 


432 


INDIA AND ABROAD OBSERVATIONS ON MANASARA 
ARCHITECTURE 


a scholarly introduction, the original text, English translation and 
157 plates in line and in colour. 

It is not too much to say that in the production of this great work 
in its present form Dr. Acharya has had to surmount myriads of 
difficulties, and he has apparently done so with remarkable success. 
No one would undertake a task of this magnitude except as a labour 
of love, for it is obvious that there could be no materia] return at all 
commensurate with the amount of work involved, covering as it has 
done in this case a period of seventeen years. When we remember other 
exacting duties which must fall to the lot of the Head of the Sanskrit 
Department (who is also the Dean of the Faculty of Arts) in a modern 
university, it is astonishing that Professor Acharya should have been 
able to accomplish his task so successfully. To decipher worn out 
manuscripts and to translate the technical terms into their English 
equivalent are alone worthy of great praise. But to illustrate the 
text with so many carefully-selected and well-executed sketches, 
diagrams and measured drawings is indeed a colossal achievement. 

The canons and scientific precision of Hindu art and architecture 
are brought out so admirably in these volumes that the theme need 
no Jonger be looked upon as unintelligible, either by scholars or by 
the general inquirer. To the Western reader they ought to bring 
a new understanding of architecture in ancient India, for they open 
a means of approach hitherto unknown in this branch of study. 

The final volume of sketches and drawings helps to make clear 
the main contents of the Manasdra. It speaks in a language that will 
be universally understood, and the work as a whole should facilitate 
the classification of Indian architecture in general. Both the northern 
style and its southern counterpart are very well brought out in 
Dr. Acharya’s work, though special reference to one or the other is 
limited. The unity of the whole is thereby emphasized, and even 
without technical knowledge of the subject the ordinary reader should 
be enabled to grasp something of the significance of Hindu art. 
Laws which have remained too long unwritten are now brought to 
light for the instruction of this generation in an ancient culture. 

Professor Acharya acknowledges the co-operation in the production 
of this work of such outstanding international scholars as Dr. F. W. 
Thomas, Dr. L. D. Barnett, and Dr. J. Ph. Vogel, whose interest in 
the undertaking is a further testimony to its scientific importance. 
What the learned world demands from India in these matters is 


433 B 


WHAT OTHERS THINK HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


certainty of data, and this has undoubiedly been supplied as a result 
of the author’s prolonged research. The Mdnasdra manuscripts are 
in a class by themselves and they have now been given to the world 
in a form which must be of permanent value. All students of the 
arts of ancient India should feel greatly indebted to Dr. Acharya 
for the illumination which he has thrown upon a comparatively 
unknown branch of Sanskrit study. The five volumes together are 
certainly a notable contribution to the available literature on the 
subject, and their compiler deserves every congratulation on the 
completion of his task. 

I ought perhaps to add that some acknowledgment is due to the 
Government of the United Provinces for the practical support which 
has been given to Dr. Acharya’s research and the publication of its 
results. There ought to be no doubt as to the proper recognition 
of this work by the local educational authorities and universities in 
India. There is no other country in the world so rich in ancient 
lore of this character, and every encouragement should be given 
to the production and utilization of works which cannot but enhance 
the status of India in the realms of art and literature. 


Prorrssor J. Po. Vocer, Leypen Universiry, HoLLaNp? 


It is now more than a century ago that the well-known Essay on the 
Architecture of the Hindus, by Ram Raz, Native Judge and Magis- 
trate at Bangalore, was published. This book, which appeared after 
the author’s death, was mainly a summary of a Sanskrit work on 
architecture, called Mdanasdra. Ram Raz’s Essay is a treatise of sixty- 
four pages, illustrated by means of forty-eight plates. 

In the year 1914 a young Sanskrit scholar from Bengal, Mr. Pra- 
sanna Kumar Acharya, ‘induced by youthful enthusiasm, ’ under- 
took the gigantic task of editing and translating the standard work 
on Indian architecture of which Ram Raz had only published a 
résumé. The Essay is, moreover, based on a single manuscript con- 
taining only fifty-eight chapters, whereas the whole Vastu-fastra now 
published consists of seventy chapters. 

It has taken Dr. Acharya more than twenty years to complete 
this enormous task, and he deserves no less credit for the perseverance 
with which he has carried it through than for the enthusiasm which 


1 Ex. Actorum Orientalium, Volumine XIV, Excerptum, pp. 224-25. 
434 


INDIA AND ABROAD OBSERVATIONS ON MANASARA 
ARCHITECTURE 


first induced him to undertake it. In 1918 he published a Summary of 
the Manasara as his Doctor’s Thesis at the University of Leyden. 
In 1927 he brought out his Dictionary of Hindu Architecture and his 
Indian Architecture according to Manasara Silpa-Sastra, both preliminary 
to the three final volumes, published in 1934, which consist of the 
Sanskrit text with appendices, index and critical notes (altogether 
more than 800 pages), the English translation with a copious index 
(another volume of some 800 pages), and a fifth volume of 157 
partly coloured plates. These plates, it should be understood, do 
not form part of the original work ; they have been prepared by three 
modern draughtsmen who have performed their task with consider- 
able skill. 

Dr. Acharya’s edition of the Mdnasdra is based on no less than 
eleven manuscripts, a full account of which will be found in his 
Preface. It is only the extent of the text which rendered the editor’s 
task a laborious one. Owing to the nature of the subject, the work 
teems with technical terms known neither from ordinary literature 
nor from the kosas, and, cons¢quently, sometimes very difficult to 
explain. But what is worse, it is couched in a language which has 
been rightly described as ‘ barbarous.’ The text presented by the 
manuscripts (none of which is ancient) cannot be considered as 
correct. The editor is no doubt correct in assuming ‘that the 
Manasaéra was never written in a chaste language and that its im- 
perfections are original.’ The same is true of other Silpa-Sastras, 
as was pointed out by Biihler many years ago. It seems that works 
of this kind were composed by craftsmen who were moved by the 
ambition of writing Sanskrit without possessing the necessary know- 
ledge of that difficult language. In these circumstances it is not 
surprising that the meaning of several passages is obscure and the 
translation uncertain. Moreover, none of the manuscripts contains 
any commentary, drawings, diagrams, or sketches. 

Dr. Acharya presents his work with a laudable modesty. He 
regards the appearance of it only as a beginning of the study of the 
subject and there can be little doubt that it is bound to render great 
services to anyone engaged in the investigation of ancient Indian 
architecture. . . - 

We have, therefore, every reason to be grateful to Dr. Acharya 
for the valuable work which he has accomplished at the expense of 
so much time and exertion. 


435 


WHAT OTHERS THINK HINDU AkCHITECTURE IN 


RAJASEVASAKTA Rao Bawapur S. KRisHNASWAMI 
AIYANGAR, M.A., PH.D.) 


We welcome the publication of this monumental work on the archi- 
tecture of the Hindus by Professor Prasanna Kumar Acharya of 
the Allahabad University. Professor Acharya has been engaged 
in the study of this subject ever since he obtained the Government 
of India scholarship to proceed to Europe, and has produced, as 
a result of his twenty years’ study, five voluminous works on Hindu 
architecture. 

It seems to be quite an accidental! coincidence that this magni- 
ficent work on the Mdanasdra should have been brought out almost 
at the centenary of its first notice in the Fournal of the Asiatic Society 
of Great Britain and Ireland by Rama Raz, the talented pioneer 
in this field of work. Rama Raz was a typical product of the nine- 
teenth century, and his work, practically the last one, as he died 
before the work was actually out, had to be brought out, such as it was, 
under disadvantages and difficulties that he had to overcome, quite 
comparable to those that Professor Acharya had actually to surmount. 
Rama Raz’s notice was based upon the few scattered chapters, and 
from a few manuscripts collected from here and there, and put 
together not by any successful effort at translation, but by what could 
more or less be guessed at by references to living workmen and extant 
buildings, with such assistance as could be got from pandits whose 
knowledge of the science was by no means profound. Having regard 
to the disadvantage under which this first work was published, it 
must be regarded as a very creditable performance, even from the 
vantage point of our possession of the whole text and the far superior 
equipment that we have for understanding and appreciating the work 
as a whole. 

The work Mdanasdra is regarded, even among architectural works, 
as one of high authority. Among architectural works so far available, 
this is undoubtedly the most comprehensive and consists of seventy 
chapters, of which the first eight are devoted to preliminaries. The next 
forty-two deal with buildings as such, the remaining chapters being 
devoted to sculpture and iconography. The introductory matter consists 
really of the invocation to the gods and rishis who seem to be called 


1 Fournal of Indian History, Vol. XIII, Part I, April, 1934. 
436 


INDIA AND ABROAD OBSERVATIONS ON MANASARA 
ARCHITECTURE 


by the name Manasara, which again would mean only rishis expert 
in architecture. The next one has to deal with measurements, quali- 
fications of the architects and so on. The third has reference to the 
divisions of the subject. The next two chapters deal with charac- 
teristics of the soil and the selection of suitable sites for various classes 
of buildings. In these chapters, the soil test and the quality required 
for particular buildings are treated with sufficient elaboration for 
various kinds of buildings. Chapter VI deals with the orientation 
of buildings, in the course cf which the principles of mechanics and 
gnomon, that is dial, etc., are described. The following chapter (VII) 
deals with site-plans. ‘Thirty-two schemes of these are given, divided 
into squares for various purposes of stiucture. The section concludes 
in the VIII chapter with the ceremonies necessary to propitiate the 
deities of the sites, etc... . 

This brief summary is enough to indicate that the Mdnasara is 
a complete work of architecture and sculpture as applied to the con- 
struction of temples and images, and all work of building connected 
therewith. Though we know of something like 300 works on these 
subjects, most of which exist only in manuscripts, none of them 
attains to the voluminous and the detailed treatment of the Mdanasara. 
A certain number have been published since, such as the Mayamaia, 
Silparaina, and Manushyalaya-chandnka in the Trivandrum Sanskrit 
Series, and a few cther elsewhere ; but none of them comes up to 
the comprehensiveness or complete details of the Mdnasara. The 
Agamaic works, both Saiva and Vaishnava, have to deal with these 
very topics, as one of the main sections of these works, both Vaishnava 
and Saiva, have reference to temple-worship. Some of them do 
give detailed description of these, the best among them being the 
Kamika Agama. This is a vast work of 160 chapters of which a fairly 
large number are devoted to these subjects. There again architec- 
ture is generally 1egarded as subsidiary to town-planning. The 
building of temples, of course, forms a part of town-planning. When 
we get to a description of temples, naturally it takes us on to the 
description of the making of images, being connected intimately with 
each other. Dr. Acharya draws attention incidentally to the fact 
that even Vedic Indians were not ignorant of stone forts or walled 
cities, stone houses, carved stones and even brick edifices, although 
they are generally regarded as being ignorant of these. A certain 
amount of information on these subjects could be collected from 


437 


WHAT OTHERS THINK HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


Buddhist literature as Dr. Acharya points out, not to speak of the 
description of palaces and towns, such as we find in the Ramayana 
and the Mahabharata and work of that kind. The Purdnas, like the 
Agamas, contain elaborate chapters upon these subjects, as again they 
have to deal with the connected subject of temple-worship. A co- 
ordinated study of these gives a detailed idea of architectural notions 
of the Hindus, and these theoretical principles could be verified from 
even existing buildings where they do exist in some number. 

We may conclude by congratulating Professor Acharya upon the 
monumental work that he has produced and brought to a term the 
labours of twenty years of devoted study. Though, accidental, so 
far as Professor Acharya is concerned, the publication of this work, 
the preface to which is dated 6th February, 1933, seems to be almost 
exactly the centenary of the completion of the first work on this sub- 
- ject by Rama Raz, as we have already noted. There could be no 
more appropriate celebration of the.centenary of the publication for 
such an important work as the Mdanasdra than this careful, complete, 
and an admirably adequate edition of the great work. Let us hope 
that this publication will lead to a scientific study of Hindu architec- 
ture with a view to the practical applications which Professor Acharya 
wants. We commend the work to those concerned with all our heart, 
and say amen to the wish of the learned editor and translator. 


G. A. Nartesan, Esg., Epiror, Inp1ian Review! 


When about seven years ago Professor Prasanna Kumar Acharya 
published the two volumes, A Dictionary of Hindu Architecture and 
Indian Architecture according to Manasara Silpa-sastra, he challenged 
the attention of the world and gave an impetus to the study of a 
long-neglected subject. He has now completed his stupendous. 
work with the publication of three volumes containing the Sanskrit 
text of Mdanasdara with critical notes, a translation of it in English, 
and illustrations in line and in colours which run to 157 plates. 
The effort has cost him about twenty years of devoted research and 
the result is an achievement which has been deservedly acclaimed 
as monumental. His marvellous tenacity of purpose has enabled 
him to succeed where others have given up the colossal task in despair. 


1 The Indian Review, May, 1934, p. 313- 
438 


INDIA AND ABROAD OBSERVATIONS ON MANASARA 
ARCHITECTURE 

He has evolved cogency out of chaos and left students of Indology 

under a deep debt of gratitude. 

Some idea of the magnitude of his labour can be gleaned from 
the fact that since 1834, when Ram Raz referred in his Essay on the 
Architecture of Hindus to the contents of a few chapters of Manasdra 
from a fragmentary manuscript on which he had lighted, the field 
remained unexplored until in the year 1914 Professor Acharya stepped 
in with his great purpose and the scholar’s enthusiasm. The unravel- 
ling of the obscure text of Mdnasdra was in itself a formidable 
endeavour. Men like Dr. G. Biihler and Sir Ramkrishna Bhandarkar 
had stigmatized it as written in the ‘most barbarous Sanskrit,’ 
while the last of those who have laid testimony to the distracting 
business of translating Mdnasdara is that eminent scholar Mahamaho- 
padhyaya Dr. Ganganatha Jha. The first work confronting Professor 
Acharya was, therefore, to compile an encyclopaedia of technical 
terms and the collation of illustrative quotations from cognate 
literature. He had then to travel from one end of the country to the 
other collecting and arranging a text written in five different scripts, 
possessing eleven badly-preserved manuscripts, subject to five recen- 
sions and comprising more than 10,000 lines of a disheartening 
language. In spite of the forbidding nature of the undertaking, how- 
ever, Professor Acharya has triumphed as editor, commentator and 
translator. 

The great value of the work to students of Indian art lies in that 
Manasara is the ‘ most complete, scientific and probably the oldest 
extant record’ of Hindu architecture dealing with everything for 
which the essence of measurement is required. 


Proressor Orro STein, UNIVERSITY OF PRAGUE, CZECHOSLOVAKIA! 


The publication of the Manasara, text and translation each forming 
a bulky volume, accompanied by a third one containing the 
plates, was preceded by two other contributions from the pen of Dr. 
Acharya, his Dictionary of Hindu Architecture and Indian Architecture 
according to Manasara Silpa-Sastra (both s.a., probably 1927 and 1928 
respectively). ‘The former work brought an alphabetically arranged 


1Archiv Orientalni, Vol. 7 (1935), no. 1-2, pp. 248-58. 
439 


WHAT OTHERS THINK HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


terminology of Indian technics, art, settlements, etc., with ample 
quotations from texts and inscriptions, and in two appendices a 
valuable list of Sanskrit works on architecture and of ‘historical 
architects, with short notes on their works.’ The second book was 
a preparatory one in regard to the present three volumes, giving 
a survey of Silpa-Sdstra, summaries and synopses of some texts, 
especially of the Mdnasdara, of its position in the literature, drawing 
a comparison with Vitruvius, and finally summing up all the indica- 
tions of the age of Manasdra ; an appendix notes down a florilegium 
of grammatical peculiarities, to use an euphemistic expression, 
what Dr. Acharya himself calls a ‘ barbarous’ Sanskrit. All that 
extensive work goes back to the year 1914, when Dr. Acharya took 
up what Professor Rapson predicted to him would become a i'fe’s 
undertaking. Now the scholar may be proud of having published the 
volumes, though they, according to his modesty, ‘do not claim to 
be other than provisional.’ No doubt, much more will have to be 
done in that field, but the credit of ‘beginning of a new line of 
Indology, which, it may be perhaps hoped, is likely to prove not 
merely of cultural and historical interest, but possibly. of some 
practical benefit to the country and to the nation’ is due to Dr. 
Acharya. 

From that edition of the Mdanasdra the study of more than one 
field of Indology will get a new stimulus, as the interrelation of Silpa- 
$dastra with many other disciplines is evident. In the first place, of 
course, the history of technical science, the history of Indian archi- 
tecture and sculpture will draw the main profit; the comparison 
between theory and practice is not only interesting, but might yield 
also chronological clues for the history of religious sects. The editor | 
has done all he could to bring out a readable text in which every 
line has been settled after careful consideration, as is to be seen from 
the Critical Notes. But Dr. Acharya has done much more; he has 
not satisfied himself with the edition, but he has rather for the first 
time brought out a translation of a Silpa-sastra. Everyone who will 
have to work in that field must either adopt his interpretation of 
the complicated materia or improve it by arguments; but nobody, 
who is aware of the intricate terminology of technical Sastras can deny 
the pioneer work done by Professor Acharya. He has, however, 
facilitated the understanding of, in some way, dead words by a special 
volume of plates, not less than 157 in number, illustrating the features 


440 


————— 


INDIA AND ABROAD OBSERVATIONS ON MANASARA 
ARCHITECTURE 

of all the buildings, sculptures, idols, etc. As great as the merit of Dr. 
Acharya may be in bringing out such a volume, the assistance he got 
by Mr. S. GC. Mukherji of the Archaeological Department, partly by 
Mr. R. L. Bansal and Sri Siddalingaswamy, by transforming the 
complicated indications of the text into drawings, appealing much 
more to a vivid comprehension than words, deserves the highest 
appreciation. And great is the obligation under which students of 
Indology may feel themselves laid to all the factors by the help of 
which such an undertaking has been effected in these days. 


SILPA-SIDDHANTI K. S. Smpatincaswami Sri JAGADGURU 
Nacatincaswamy Mata 


The world is much grateful to you for the great help you have 
done in publishing the Mdnasdara grantha which is a valuable and pre- 
cious guide to the artists. As far as we know there is scarcely a grantha 
of this type available to guide the artists. After I went through this 
grantha my desire was to give a series of pictures for all the Manasara. 
I am also trying for this. It was so long impossible to get a correct 
grantha in complete form. This difficulty has been solved by you. 


Raja Set Pratap SincH (or Maxiapur, UniTeD PRroviNcEs) 


I have been fortunate enough to see all your five volumes on the 
Hindu architecture. You have really taken great pains to revive the 
old art belonging to us which was dying out. You have done a 
great service... by completing such an important work. How 
much I wish to pay my respects to you in token of my appreciation 
for such a noble work. 


Times LITERARY SUPPLEMENT! 


Architecture, like most phases of intellectual activity, finds a 
-place in Sanskrit literature, incidentally in the Purdéna, Agamas, and 
similar works, and in detail in that extensive technical literature known 
as the Silpa-sastras, of which the best known example is the Manasara. 
Etymologically the word ‘ Manasara ’ means ‘ the essence of measure- 
ment,’ but in certain connexions scems to be applied to the author 


14th February, 1935. 
44.1 


WHAT OTHERS THINK HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


of the work, while in one passage in the treatise it has been used in 
both senses. There is nothing in the work itself to indicate the date 
of a compilation with certainty, but Dr. Acharya would place it 
provisionally between A.D. 500 and 700. 

Dr. Acharya’s three volumes appear most appositely, marking a 
centenary in the study of Hindu architecture, for it was in 1834 that 
Ram Raz published in English his Essay on the Architecture of the 
Hindus, based on a fragmentary manuscript of the Manasdra. It may 
seem strange that the publication of a complete text of such impor- 
tance should have been so long delayed, but Sanskritists were little 
attracted to a purely technical work having no claims to literary 
excellence and abounding in words used in a technical sense differing 
entirely from their derivative literal rendering and, moreover, not 
to be found in dictionaries. A belief that the Mdanasdra is the standard 
Hindu work on architecture and sculpture prompted Dr. Acharya to 
undertake the difficult and laborious task of editing this text and has 
sustained him in his unremitting labours for some twenty years. 

The three volumes now issued are the third, fourth, and fifth of 
an Encyclopaedia of Hindu Architecture, the author having in 1927 
published, as the first volume, A Dictionary of Hindu Architecture 
treating of Sanskrit architectural terms, and, as the second, Indian 
Architecture according to the Manasara Silpa-fastra. In the third volume 
Dr. Acharya now makes available for the first time the complete 
Sanskrit text of the Mdnasdra, based on eleven badly-preserved 
manuscripts written in five different scripts and has added three 
appendices, a Sanskrit index, and over 300 pages of critical notes in 
English. That the elucidation of the text calls for such extensive 
annotation witnesses to the difficulties presented by the defective 
manuscripts and the industry and scholarship of the author. In 
his preface to the English translation Dr. Acharya has indicated the 
method followed in its preparation and the limits imposed by the 
imperfect texts. Within those limits he has produced a clear and 
readable translation, and it is but rarely that we are left with such 
cryptic passages as “ He (Garuda) is known to have the posture of bent 
mixedness in the walking pose and collectiveness in the sitting pose.’ 

From the complete text it is now plain that architecture in the 
Madnasara is taken in its widest sense and includes systems of measure- 
ment, selection of sites, town-planning, foundations, bricks, plinths, 
bases, pillars, entablatures, chariots, couches, thrones, crowns and 


44.2 


INDIA AND ABROAD OBSERVATIONS ON MANASARA 
ARCHITECTURE 


personal ornaments, doors, windows, staircases, wells and drains and 
even balances and baskets and cages for birds and beasts. The carv- 
ing and casting of images of deities, sages and donors and the mak- 
ing of cult objects occupy no fewer than twenty of the seventy chapters. 
That the Mdnasara is a practical work based on experience and 
actual measurement of the then existing architectural and sculptural 
objects can hardly be doubted, but mingled with the technica] detail 
are many ritual rules and other extraneous matter, not however with- 
out considerable interest. Hindu fondness for classification is evi- 
denced in the multiplicity of types, and we have thirty-two varieties 
of site-plans, fifty kinds of mouldings and sixty-four types of column 
bases and so on, until it becomes difficult to determine where reality 
ends. The importance of exact proportion and strict adherence to 
the rules annunciated is emphasized throughout the wo1k, and this is 
based not only on aesthetic considerations, for a whole chapter is 
devoted to penalties arising from any deviation. For instance it is 
laid down that, ‘ If the staircase be less or greater the master would 
certainly be crippled,’ and such might indeed happen from such a 
faulty construction ; but it seems somewhat severe that “if the height 
of a pillar be lower or higher the family and race of the master will be 
exterminated.’ Light is thrown on the religious toleration of the 
age, for two chapters are devoted to rules for the making of Buddhist 
and Jain images. 

Of storeyed buildings three styles are mentioned, namely, Nagara, 
Vesara and Dravida, and Dr. Acharya considers these terms as 
geographical and would render them as the architectural styles of 
North, East and South India respectively. These three terms, 
however, occur several times in the text in connexion with such differ- 
ent objects as the linga, yont and cars, and there merely in the sense 
of square, circular or hexagonal. But whatever the meaning of 
Nagara, Vesara and Dravida, it is impossible to escape from the 
feeling that the architecture of the Manasara is, in general, that of 
South India, for the many-storeyed gopura, the clustered columns, 
heavy entablatures, numerous court-yards, halls of a thousand 
columns, etc., have still their living examples at Tanjore, Tiruvalur, 
and Srirangam, but are not only absent nowadays in Northern India 
but were equally so in the period assigned to the Mdnasara, as ex- 
cavation at numerous sites in that region have revealed no traces of 
such monuments, and the buildings of Northern India described by 


443 


WHAT OTHERS THINK HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


the Chinese pilgrims, who were in India between a.D. 500 and 700, 
are not those of the Manasara. ‘That eight of the eleven manuscripts 
consulted by Dr. Acharya were in South Indian scripts is not without 
significance. 

Although it is impossible to be perfectly certain of the interpre- 
tation of all the terms used in the Mdanasdra, Dr. Acharya has felt that 
an endeavour should be made to illustrate as far as possible the 
architectural and sculptural forms detailed therein, and the fifth 
volume consists of 157 plates. For these he has naturally had to rely 
upon others, but has been fortunate in obtaining for the preparation 
of those illustrating sculpture and ornament the assistance of K. S. 
Siddhalingaswamy, ‘A Silpin by heredity,’ and a master working 
to the living Sastraic tradition, whose drawings, eleven of them in 
colour, seem thoroughly in keeping with the spirit cf the text. For 
most of the architectural illustrations he is indebted to Mr. S. C. 
Mukerji, a trained architect and a. graduate in Sanskrit, whose 121 
line drawings are a piaiseworthy attempt to interpret the very diffi- 
cult text. In general he has done this with success, but the staircase 
im Plate xcrx appears too European in style, the Bengali roof of the 
canopied throne of Plate cxxx, and the foiled arch of the late Mughal 
type of the Pushpa-torana on Plate cxxxm are more than doubtful for 
so early a period as that assigned to the Manasara, while the repre- 
sentation of the Kalpa-vriksha on Plate cxxxv deviates from the text 
description of this wonder-working tree, of which an early sculptural 
example exists in the Indian Museum, Calcutta, and inspiration for 
which might have been sought in the garlanded trees of the Bharhut 
and Sanchi gateways and railings. 


LEacuE oF Nations, InrorMATION MrusuELLEst 


Eprrorist : Le Manasdra, cette ceuvre classique sur l’architecture 
hindoue, a fait, ces derniéres années, l’objet de la publication de cing 
fort volumes, comptant ensemble prés de 3.000 pages. Les deux pre- 
miers volumes, parus en 1927, sont épuisés. Nous ne pouvons donc 
faire état ici que des trois derniers, et, plus particuliérement du quat- 
riéme Architecture of Mdanasara qui est la traduction en anglais du texte 
sanscrit original contenu dans le troisitme volume. Le cinquiéme 
réunit les illustrations auxquelles le texte se référe. 


1 June, 1934. 
444 


INDIA AND ABROAD OBSERVATIONS ON MANASARA 


ARCHITECTURE 

Le texte publié est basé sur les onze manuscrits existants, réunis 
par Sir Austen Chamberlain, alors secrétaire d’Etat pour les Indes, 
en vue de la rédaction de cet ouvrage. A l’exception d’un seul, ces 
manuscrits sont tous fragmentaires et aucun ne comprend des com- 
mentaires, dessins ou diagrammes. Si des spécialistes avaient déja 
cité des extraits de l’'un ou de l’autre de ces manuscrits, nul n’en avait 
encore tenté la traduction. Quelques textes sanscrits sur ’architecture 
ont bien été imprimés au cours des derniéres années, mais aucun 
n’avait été jusqu’a présent traduit en anglais ou commenté en aucune 
langue, hindoue ou européenne. C’est 4 Sir John Marshall, directeur 
général de l’Archéologie, que l’on doit lidée de la publication d’une 
édition établie sur des bases scientifiques de cet ouvrage essentiel sur 
Varchitecture hindoue. La traduction du texte original devait 
étre accompagnée des commentaires nécessaires, de dessins et 
diagrammes. Dans la préface de lourvage actuel, P. K. Acharya 
retrace les différentes étapes de la préparation de l’ouvrage qui parait 
maintenant, aprés dix-sept ans d’un labeur continu. D’un grand 
intérét, aussi bien culturel qu’historique, il semble appelé 4 rendre 
également des services pratiques. La politique de larchitecture aux 
Indes, basée depuis quelques siécles déja sur limitation étrangére, en 
dépit des conditions climatériques toutes différentes, n’a pas toujours 
eu des résultats heureux. On pergoit de ce fait la portée pratique 
que peut présenter la Manasara. II reste a verifier si les monuments 
parvenus jusqu’a nous, ont été édifiés selon les régles et principes 
exposés dans le Mdanasara. Si, tout en tenant compte des conditions 
actuelles, il est avéré que ces méthodes sont scientifiquement appli- 
cables, il serait intéressant de les expérimenter sur des constructions 
modernes. 

Les deux premiers ouvrages publiés a ce sujet, par M. Acharya 
et actuellement épuisés (A Dictionary of Hindu Architecture, Indian 
Architecture according to Mdnasara) ont suscité un tel intérét qu’ils 
Yont amené a mettre le probléme a l’étude de la facon la plus systé- 
matique dans l’état actuel de nos connaissances. Le texte original 
est souvent trés défectueux et Vinterprétation n’en est pas toujours 
certaine. C’est grace a la collaboration de Mr. §. C. Mukherji, 8.a., G.p. 
ARC., A.LIA., attaché au département archéologique qu’ont été &tablies 
les illustrations, interprétation graphique aussi fidéle que possible du 
texte. Aprés plusicurs tentatives‘qu’il fallut abandonner, 32 dessins 
de sculptures, au trait et en couleurs, ont été exécutés par Silpa 


445 


WHAT OTHERS THINK HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


Siddhanti Sivayogi Sri Siddalingaswamy, chef du monastére Jagad- 
guru Nagalinsgaswamy. Nul n’était mieux placé, 4 tous égards, 
pour entreprendre cette tache qui lui coiita six mois de travail, aprés 
des essais et expériences qui ne durérent pas moins d’un an. Conscient 
des difficultés que présentait la tache de traduire un texte aussi mutilé, 
iraitant de sujets aussi techniques l’auteur s’est attaché a serrer le 
texte d’aussi prés que possible, et a éviter toute interprétation hasar- 
deuse. Dans une préface trés documentéc, il indique briévement le 
contenu de chacun des 70 chapitres qui composent l’ouvrage et dont 
les huit premiers servent d’introduction, les 42 suivants traitant de 
questions d’architecture, les vingt derniers consacrés a la sculpture. 
Une liste de manuscrits traitant des sujets analogues est donnée 
a la suite du dictionnaire d’architecture hindoue. Ces mémes manus- 
crits sont briévement analysés dans la préface du tome IV. 

La date du Mdnasdra, longuement discutée dans le premier 
volume, ne pourra étre vraiment fixée que le jour of I’on aura réussi 
a identifier auteur du traité—a moins qu’il ne s’agisse d’une compila- 
tion. Le sens méme du titre reste incertain. Dans le texte méme, 
Manasara est employé dans plusieurs acceptions différentes. Ceux qui 
estiment que lVouvrage a été inspiré plus ou moins directement par 
le roi de ce nom, font remonter le document au vm? siécle, d’autres 
reculent cette date jusqu’a 450 environ ; d’autres encore, s’appuyant, 
sur des similitudes avec le traité de Vitruve (25 av. J.-C.) estiment 
quwil peut avoir été composé aussi bien quelques siécles avant qu’aprés 
ce dernier ouvrage. 

La préface du troisitéme volume (Ménasdra—Sanskrit Text with 
critical notes) donne la description détaillée des onze munscrits sur 
lesquels est bas¢e la publication de ce texte. 


PRAVASI, THE LEADING BENGALI MAGAZINE! 


Eprrorrat : Allahabad Viswa-vidhyalayer Sarnskrita vibhager 
adhyaksha adhyapak doctor Prasanna Kumar Acharyer panditya 
dirgha-kal-vyapi parisram o adhyavasayer gune prachin Bharatavar- 
sher sthapatya o mirti-Silpa sambandhiya Manasar namak prasiddha 
granther ekti utkrishta Sarnskaran prakasita haiyachhe. Taj-janya 
tini prithivir samuday prachya-vidyanuragir kritajfiata-bhajan. Thate 


1 Chaitra and Vaishak, B. S. 1341. 
446 


INDIA AND ABROAD OBSERVATIONS ON MANASARA 

ARCHITECTURE 
Manasarer miil sarhskrita, sarnskrita parisishta, pratyek sabda kon 
kon prishthay achhe tahar anukramanika, pratyek adhyayer nana 
patha-bhed o tika, samagra grantha-khanir Ingreji anuvad, Ingrajite 
vistarita vishay-stichi o Sabda-siichi, grantha-karer rachita sarhskrita o 
dirgha Ingreji bhimika, evath 157 sumudrita plate anek-Sata grihadir 
naksa o mirtir chitra achhe. Bahu-sarnkhyak mirti-chitra bahu-varne 
mudrita. Aj-kal prachin Bharatiya sthapatyer prati Sikshita-Srenir 
lokder kichhu drishti padiyachhe. Kintu sthapatya o mirt:-Silpa sam- 
bandhe prachin Bharatiyader gaveshan4, anuSilan o jfian ki-riip vista- 
rita o suspashta chhila, taha kam loke-i janiten evarn sakaler janibar 
upay-o chhila na. Doctor Acharyer grantha dekhile taha jana ya-i-be. 
Grantha-khanir miilya lekha na-i. Sakale kinite paribena bate, kintu 
sakal vi$wa-vidydlayer library-te, sakal bada kalejer, viseshatah engine- 
ering college-r library-te, Art school sakaler library-te, bada bada 
engineer-der o griha-nirmaté company-der pustak- sarhngrahe iha 
rakshita ha-o-ya ekanta avaSyak. Tha Bharata-varsher ye sav viswa- 
vidyalaye engineering vibhag a@chhe tahar angibhiita engineering 
college-gulite evath viswa-vidyalayer sahit samparka-Sinya engineer- 
ing college o vidyalay-samihe agrasar chhatrader adhitavya pustak- 
baliya nirddharita ha-o-ya kartavya. Amfader visvas e-i ye, yadi 
Sir Asutosh Mukhopadhyaya ekhan jivita thakiten, taha ha-i-le 
tini niéchay-i e-i pustak-khani Kalikata (Calcutta) viswa-vidyalayer 
engineering upadhi-prarthi-der avaSya-pathya grantha-samther anya- 
tama baliya nirddharan kariten. Ekhan i-ha antatah Kashir Hindu 
Viswa-vidydlayer engineering college-e adhita ha-o-ya uchit. Grantha- 
khanike vigwa-vidyalayer adhitavya karile paroksha suphal e-i ha- 
i-be ye, prachin Bharatiya-der sthapatya o mirti-Silper jhaner 
pariman sambandhe satya dharana janmi-be. Ta-chhada, e-i ubhay 
Silpe prachin-era yadi kona bhram kariya thaken, nitan jnan o 
gaveshanar prabhave tahar Sarhsodhan ha-i-be. Karan prachin va 
adhunik kona lekhak-der-i kona vishayer jian sampirna va chi- 
danta na-he. 


ViISAL-BHARAT, THE LEADING Hinprt Macazine! 


‘ Manasar’ sthapatya kala-ka ek atyant prachin sarhskrit granth 
hai. Is grantha-ka astitva sau-sava-sau varsha pahale se jfat tha; 


1 Braj Mohan Verma : Jeth, V.S. rggr. 
447 


WHAT OTHERS THINK HINDU ARCHITECTURE IN 


lekin uskaé prakagan ab-tak na ho saka tha. Granth irhjiniyaro-n, 
Silpiyo-n, miurtikaro-n aur karigaro-n ke liye vyavaharik dhang par 
likha gaya tha, aur jan padta hai ki unhi-n logo-n-ke hath-me raha. 
Prachin kal me-n chhape-khane to the nahi-n, sabhi granth hath-se 
hi nakal kiye jate the. ‘Manasar’-ka kam jinhe-n padta tha, ve prayah 
be-padhe-likhe Silpi aur karigar hote the. Unke dvara nakal kiye 
jane-me-n aSuddhi-ya-n rah jana sambhava hi nahi-n, varan avagy- 
ambhavi tha. Phal yah hua ki samay-ke pher-se ‘ Manasar ’-ki jo 
pratiya-n vartman kal tak pahu-n-chi-n, ve aSuddhiyo-n-ka bhandar 
ban ga-i-n. Unki bhasha itni aSuddha ho gai hai ki Sir Bhandarkar 
aur Dr. Biihler ne uski bhasha ko atyant, ‘ barbar’ sarhskrit likha 
hai. 

Sri Prasanna Kumar Acharya-ne bis varsha-ke sudirgh parigram 
ke bad ‘ Manasar ’-ko tin jildo-n me-n prakasit kiya hai. 

*“Manasar’ apne dharmg-ka anokha granth hai. Is-se Bharatki 
Prachin sabhyata aur kala-par jo prakas padega, uska milya anka 
nahi-n ja sakta. Pustak sattar adhyayo-n-me-n vibhakta hai... 
Samaj-ki vibhinna Sreniyo-n-ki haisiyat-ke anusar un-ke makan bhi 
ek-se le-kar barah talle tak-ke bataye gaye hai-n, aur unki har 
tarah-ki lambai-chaudai-ka anupat-adi visad-riip-se sam-jhaya gaya 
hai. Yah sun-kar ascharya hota hai ki abse lag-bhag do hazar 
varsha pahale Bharat-me-n barah talle in-che aur talabo-n-ki 
buniyade-n, khambhe, unke bhed aur akar, chhate-n, gumbad, sikhar, 
imarati saman (patthar, in-ten, lakdi aur dh&tu-ki chize-n), toran, 
naliya-n, sidhiya-n aur zine, ahata, angan, darvaze, khidkiya-n, maha- 
rabe-n ityadi sthapatya-se sambandha rakhne vali pratyek vastuke 
vivaran * Manasar ’-me-n maujiid hai-n. Iske atirikta, savariya-n, rath 
simhasan, furniture-ki chize-n aur Hindu, Bauddha, Jain mirtiya-n 
ityadi banane-ke sambandh-men bhi vyavaharik siksha ‘ Manasar ’- 
men maujiid hai. 

Sriyut Acharya-ne jin kathina-iyo-n-ka samna karte huye is karya- 
ko kiya hai, unhe-n dekhte huye, unki jitni praéarnsa ki jay thodi 
hai. Bharat-sarkar aur Yukta-Prantiya sarkar ne is mahan granth- 
ke prakaSan-me-n jo sahayata di hai, uske liye ve bhi badhai-ke 
patra hai-n. 

Zarurat is bat-ki hai ki Bihar-ke punar nirman-ke karyame-n jo 
imginiyar tatha anya log bhag le rahe hai-n, ve is granth-ko achchhi 
tarah padhe-n aur navin vaijfianik Avishkaro-n aur jankariyo-n 


448 


INDIA AND ABROAD OBSERVATIONS ON MANASARA 
ARCHITECTURE 
ka avasyak samaveS karke ‘ Manasar’ me-n varnit sthapatya aur 
nagar-rachana adiko kam-men layen. .. . 
Is pustak-ka Hindi-me-n nikalna atyanta avasyak hai. 


HINDUSTANI, THE LEADING HINDI QUARTERLY? 


Prayag-visva-vidyalaya ke sarhskrit-vibhag ke adhyaksha Doctor 
Prasanna Kumar Acharya, L£.s., M.A., PH.D., D.LITT., mahodaya ne 
jis yogyata aur parisram se pafich jildo-n men prachin-Bhartiya- 
vastuvidya sarhbandhi vishayo-n par prakas dala hai, uske liye ve 
hamare dhanyavad ke patra hai-n. Prastut paiich jildo-n ka prakasan 
kar ham4re prant ki sarkar ne prachin Bharatiya sarnskriti ke adhya- 
yan me e Bharatiya itihas ke jijftasuo-n ke liye ek _atyant upayogi 
hai... . yah 48a karna anuchit nahi-n ki in grantho-n ke adhyayan 
se ein me Bhartiya itihas par bahut kuchh prakas pad sakega 
aur hamara ajfiat vigat bahut kuchh prakas-maya ho kar hamare 
samne upasthit hoga aur hame-n apni prachin sarskriti aur vigat 
unnat avastha ka parichaya kara sakega. 


1 1935, Mr. Satyajeevan Verma, M.A. 


449 


INDEX 


A 


Azacus, identified with vahana, 230. 

ABHANGA, a pose, slight flexion, 138, 
155- 

AsuAsa, class of building, 113, 114, 
225. 

— — doors, 234. 

— phalli, 140. 

— prakara, 116. 


— in Kadmikagama, 144. 

— style of pavilions, 120. 

ABHAYA (PANI-MuDRA), refuge-granting 
attitude of hand, 138, 139, 143, gor. 

ABHAYADANA, temple of, 320. 

ABHAYAGIRI, a daguba of Anuradha- 
pur, 291. 

— ascribed to 
Abhaya, 291. 

ABHIDHANA-KO%A, lexicography, 16. 


ABHISHEKA-LAKSHANA, crown and 
coronation, 131. 

ABHISHEKA-MANDAPA, coronation-hall, 
124, 132. 


AsjA (or ambuja or padma or saro- 
ruha), a moulding partly correspond- 
ing to cyma, 203. 

ABJAKANTA, a class 
buildings, 116, 189. 

Asopes of five kinds, allowed to Bhik- 
khus, 66. 

Asu, temple of, 260, 261. 

ACCOMMODATION, in an ordinary Vedic 
house, 56. 

ACHAEMENIDS, style of architecture of, 
377. 378. 

Acwar, preceptor, 329. 

AcHARYA, supreme director, 98. 

ADBHUTA, a proportion in architectural 
measurement, 105, 108, 200. 

— class of buildings in Kdmikagama, 
195: 

— a two-storeyed buildings, 115, 
187. 

ApDHAMA, smallest type of ten-tala 
system, 145. 


of ten-storeyed 


King Valtagamini | 


ADHARA, moulding, 204. 
— support of a chariot, 127. 
— the base, 111. 


ADHIRAJA (or MAHARAJA, q.7.), class of 
kings, 264. 


| — head-dress of, 132. 


— ornaments suited to, 134. 
ADHISHTHANA-VIDHANA, base, 108-109, 
III, 144, 227, 261. 


glass, of three kinds, 137, 138, 151. } ADHIVASANA, ceremony at coronation, 


132. 
Avr-MANnA, and its nine varieties, 197- 
— primary measurement, 144. 
ApisAra, authority on architecture in 

Manasdra, 155, 212, 245. 
AprryapHarma, Maharajadhiraja, first 

King of Java, 354, 355- 
Apr-Visnyu (or Vasudeva, or Janar- 

dana), temples in villages and towns 

of, 272. 

GAMA, a special class of works belong- 

ing to Southern India, 85. 

— deals extensively with architectural 

matters, 85. 

— details about architectural styles in, 

206. 

— indebted to Mdnasdara, 208. 

— similarity of, to Silpa-sastras, 85-86. 

AGARWAL, the Hon’ble Rai Amarnath, 
acknowledgment of assistance 

received from, xxvii. 

— Rai Ramcharan, acknowledgment 

of assistance received from, xxvii. 
AcastyA, hermitage of, 360. 

— blackstone image of, 360. 

— built a temple of Bhadraloka, 360. 
— image and measurement of, 147. 
Acasrtya, an authority on architecture, 

170. - 

— authority on which Visvakarma 

treatise is based, 171. 

— SUED ers borrowed from, in Samgraha, 

183. 

— connexion with Mayamata and Mana- 

S@ra, 171. 


— some chapters similar to those of 
Manasara, 171. 


451 


INDEX 


AGASTYA-SAKALADHIKARA, a treatise on 
architecture, 170-171. 

Acuana, hollow, 118. 

AGHANA-MANA, architectural measure- 
ment, 200. 

Acni-PurAna,. dilates on architectural 
matters at great length, 82-83. 

— forty-five types of buildings under 
five classes in, 189-190. 

— relation of direct influence with 
Garuda-Purana, 250. 

— — indebtedness to Mdnasara, 240. 

— referred to, by Bana, 277. 

— types of buildings compared with 
those of other Puranas, Agamas, Mana- 
sara and Brihat-samhita,195-196. 

Acni-SALaA, hall of fire-altar in the 
centre, 56. 

AxuKA, one of the two merchants who 
built the Vaidyanatha temple in 
Kangra, 289. 

Auura-Mazpa, image of, 391, 413. 

— not identical with Maya-Asura, 247. 

AINDRAJALA, art of jugglery, 9. 

AIRAvATA, a class of five-storeyed 
buildings, 115, 188. 

AITAREYA-BRAHMANA, reference to 

angula measure in, 198. 

AIWAN, opening in the centre of the 
roof, 304. 

Aryanear, S. K., on Manasdara architec- 
ture, 436. 

AJANTA, Monuments at, 260, 309. 

— influence of, 313. 

— marks of destruction at, 416. 

AxaRA-JNANA, mining, 14. 

AxsHA, axle, 127. 

AXSHA-KRIDA, playing with dice, 17. 

AKSHA-MALA, rosary, attribute of 
Brahma, 138. 

— of Sarasvati and Brahmani, 142, 
145: 

AKSHARA-MUSHTIKA-KATHANA, guessing 
of letters, etc., in a closed fist, 14. 

— of two kinds, 14-15. 

AKsHOBHYA, cardinal Buddha, 286. 

ger the wicker work in Vedic huts, 
56. 

Ax-siPIL, ancient fortifications at, 299. 


ALAJAGHIT, a type of altar, 393. 


AxakA, kind of head-dress for queens 
of praharaka and asiragraha, 132. 

ALAMBANA-BAHU, balustrade, 72. 

AxauncsiTHu, builder of Thatpyinuyu, 
321, 0. 2. 

ALBERUNI, who mentions 
Puranas, 277. 

ALEKHYA, painting, 6. 


eighteen 


ALINDA, verandah, 70, I19. 
Aue, 2 moulding, 204. 
ALLAHABAD, pillar of Asoka at, 382. 


Apa, class of buildings in Kamikdgama, 
195; 

ALTARS, construction and measurement 
of, 393. 

— in India, 392-393. 

— in Persia, 392. 

— ten classes of, 393. 

AMALAKA, Amala-Sila, 261. 

AMALAKA, vantika-pitham, chair with 
many legs, 74. 

Amata-SILA, large, fluted, circular block 
crowning the summit in Northern 
temples, 261. 

— identical with maiirdhni-ishtaka of 
Nagara style, 261. 

AMARABATI, traces of pillars at, 382. 

— representation of /ats in, 382. 

PARA EORTA, architectural terms in, 
96. 

AMARAVATI, monastery at, resembling 
Depung monastery of Tibet, 284. 

AMBARANATH, temple at, 261. 

Amson (or AmpontA), group of islands, 
architectural remains in, 351. 

AmBujA, see ABJA. 

AMERICA, CENTRAL, traces of Indian 
architecture in, 372-375- 

AmiITrABHA, a cardinal Buddha, 286. 

AMLUK-DARA, ruined stipa at, 315. 

Pepe DDH: a cardinal Buddha, 
286. 

AmrITA-NANDANA, class of halls, 404. 

Ams$a, for arigula, 145. 

Améu, name of a moulding, 204. 


452 


INDEX 


AMSUMAD-BHEDA, architectural chapters 
in, 162-165. 

— comparison with Manasdara, 162-165. 

— Kasyapa, 161. 

— largely influenced by Manasara, 
165. 

— reference to édla2 measurement in, 
pen a ao 

— similarity to Mdnasara, 162. 

— treatise on architecture, 162-165. 


AmSUMADBHEDAGAMA, architectural 
matters in, 92. 

— details of tala measures taken from, 
by Rao, 200. 

AmsuvURMAN family, of Nepal, 285. 

ANAHITA, statue of, 395. 

Anana, face, 191. 

AnanpA, image of, 283. 

— 23-feet high figure of, in Gal- 
Vihara, 292. 

— temple with arch and vault near 
Pagan, and its plan, 320. 

ANAURAHTA, who built Lokananda 
Pagoda, 318. 

— —WNan Paya, 320. 

— —Pitakat-Taik, 321. 

Anpura (the corrupt form of Randhra) 
(see RANDHRA), 206, 207. 

— branch of Vesara style of architec- 
ture, 257. 

— hexagonal car, 127. 

ANDHRAS, empire of, 267. 

ANga-BHUSHANA, ornaments of the 
body, 134. 

ANGA-pUSHANA, defects of limbs, 156- 
157, 236. 

ANGHRI, a moulding, 204. 

— dwarf pillars, 1g0. 

ANcuRI-PADA, dwarf pillars, 130. 

Ancirasa, authority on architecture, 
172. 

Anckor THoM, capital of Cambodian 
kingdom, 339, 345: 

— a hundred years required for cons- 
truction of, 345. 

— completed by YaSovarman, 339, 345- 

— general plan of, 345. 

— palace enclosure of, 345-350. 


ANGKOR-VAT, 326, 338. 

— absence of arch and dome, but 
numerous pillars in, 342. 

— — Buddhist features in, 343. 

— abundance of snake symbols in, 
342-343- 

— belongs to the third group of 
Cambodian temples, 340. 

— capable of providing needs of a 
court, 346. 

— completed by Siryavarman II, 339. 

— identity of, 342-343. 

— profusion of sculptures in, 342. 

— situation, area, and general plan of, 
Al. 

Sg AE proper of, 341-342. 

ANGULA, finger-breadth, unit of mea- 
surement, 98, 145, 197-198, 207. 

— three kinds of, 145, 152. 

ANGULIYAKA, finger-ring, 134. 

ANILA-BHADRAKA, Class of cars, 127. 

ANIRUDDHA, authority on architecture 
in Maisya-Purdna, 245. 

ANKURARPANA, ceremony at coronation, 
132. 

Anis corresponds to ancient Cham- 
pa-desa, 316. 

ANNULET, See FILLET. 

ANTAH-SALA, inner part of palaces, 124. 

ANTA-HARA, second court, 116, 233. 

ANTARA, interspace, 144. 

— also antardla, antartka, antarita, a 
moulding like fillet, 204. 

ae ante-room, 114. See ANTARA 

so. 

ANTARIKA, see ANTARA. 

ANTARIKSHA, 125. 

ANTARIKSHA-KANTA, a Class of ten- 
storeyed buildings, 116, 189. 

ANTARITA, see ANTARA. 

ANTAR-MANDALA; innermost court, 116, 
117, 283. 

AnTIKA, a kind of two-storeyed build- 
ings, 187. 

ANURADHAPUR, Buddhist monuments 
at, 291. 

— capital of Ceylon and one of Bud- 
dhism, 290. 


— some of the temples of, built as | Apasastonira (or Savana), class of 


palaces, 346. 


building, 86, 114, 187, 194. 


453 


INDEX 


ApasramBa, full particulars of altars ; ARDHA-HARA, string of pearls worn 


in, 393- 

APA-vATSYA, a quarter for temple of 
Ifa, 272. 

AR#OSTYLOS, type of temples in Vitru- 
vius, 225. 

ArAma, rest-house, 69. 


Arcu, absence of, in Cambodian archi- 
tecture, 342. 

— decorations of, 130. 

— of four classes, 133. 

— ornament for thrones, 
shapes, 130. 

— systematically employed in Burma, 
320. 

ArcuireEcts, gifts to, 131. 


ARCHITECTURE, adaptability of Indian 
style, 419. 

— arts included in, 410-411. 

— Brahmanical necessity of the many 
schools included in, 77. 

— Buddhist, 65-75. 

— Chalukyan, 77, 78. 

— Dravidian, 77, 78. 

— Epic, 78-80. 

— essence of, 410. 

— foreign elements in Indian styles, 
414-415. ’ 

— funerary, in India, 391, 413. 

— — in Persia, 390-391, 413. 

— Hindu, abroad, xi, xii, 283-375. 

— — materials for the history of, ix, 
x. 

— — nature and future of, xii, xiii ; 
408. 

— —no Persian influence on, xii, 
376-407 ; 413-414. 

— — survey of, xi ; 27-28. 

— Jain, 75-77. 

— merging capacity of Indian styles, 
414. 

— military, in Persia, 397. 

— Pallava, 77, 78. 

— Puranic, 80-84. 

— sources of Indian styles, 417-419. 

— treatises on most of them compila- 
tions, 185. 

— Vedic, 54-64. 

— what is meant by Indian styles, 411. 

ARDHA-CHITRA, semi-transparent glass, 
138. 


of various 


| round the neck, 134. 
| Arpua-NARISVARA, images in the Siva 
temple at Yajfiasala, xiv. 
ARDDHAYOGA, bungalow type of old 
Bengal buildings, 414. 
— partly religious partly residential 
building, 66, 67. 
ARGALA, a moulding, 204. 


ARKAKANTA, a class of eleven-storeyed 
buildings, 116, 189. 

ARRIAN, 400. 

Arsua, class of phalli, 140. 


Arts, an account of, 1-26. 

Buddhistic, 20-21. 

called Silpa, or Kala or Silpa-kala, 1. 
Christian, 21-22. 

classified in groups, 17-18. 

— Hindu, 22-24. 

— in various treatises, 1-5. 

— list of sixty-seven, in Kdamdsitra, 


-17. 

—’ Muhammadan, 21. 

— number sixty-four a fictitious one, 
17. 

— oof Central Asia, influenced by 
Hindu culture, 314. 

— primitive, cubic, mixed, classic, 
pyramidal, and derived, 330-331. 

— qualifications of a student of, 4-5. 


— referred to in three classes of 
literatures, I. 
— religious origin and _ secular 


character of, 24. 
— remarks in the list of, 18-19. 
—- sub-divided into, 5-18, 17. 
— traditional number, sixty-four, 1. 
— youth and beauty essential for 
cultivation of, 19-20. 
' ARTAXERKES, Codomanus, entombed at 
Naksh-i-Rustam, 390. 
| — hypostyle hall of, 388. 
| — Mnemon, 390. 
| ArTHA-SAsTRA OF KauTILivA, architec- 
tural matter described in, 92, 2. 
— Manasara indebted to, 208. 
— reference to agula measures in, 
198. : 
Artist, divided in four classes by Mana- 
| Sard, 214. 


454 


INDEX 


Asamcurra (or AsANA), class of build- 
ings, 86, 114, 187. 
AsamyojvA, class of bhiishana-yojana art, 


9. 
Asana (or AsamMcuiTa), a moulding, 204. 


— class of building, 86, 114, 187. 

— — three-storeyed buildings, 
188. 

— seats, 128. 

— sitting posture and its types, 154, 
154 n. I. 

AsANDAKO, rectangular chair, 74. 

Asanpi, settee, 59, 60. 

— God’s, 60. 

— imperial and sacrificial, 60. 

— its construction, 60. 

— King’s, 60. 

— large couches, 74. 

— originated with nobility, 60. 

AsHTAsRA, octangular building, 192, 
193, 194. 

AsHTA-TALA, eight-storeyed building, 
115. : 
— system of measurement, 142, 146, 

148. 
ASoxa, conquest of Kalinga by, 266. 
— emissaries of, and visit to Champa, 


115; 


29. 

ine of, 381-382. 

— references to Cholas, Pandyas, etc. 
by, 266. 

— relation between North and South 
in time of, 265-266. 

— sent missionaries to Cambodia, 343. 

— — to Siam, 322-323, 324. 

— visited Nepal and built five chailyas 
at Patan, 285. 

ASraMAGARA, a class of seven-storeyed 
buildings, 115, 188. 

AssEMBLY Hauts, described in Maha- 
bharata, 79. 

AsTHANA-MANDAPA, 
audience, 124. 

ASTRAGAL, a Graeco-Roman moulding, 
203, 230. 

— identified with Hara, 230. 

ASTRAGRAHIN, class of kings, 124, 264, 
404. 

— head-dress of, 132. 

— ruler of several districts, 265, 


— throne of, 129. 


hall of public 


ASTROLOGICAL WworRKS, architectural 


matters in, 94-95. 

ASVAGHOSHA, visit to Cambodia, 343. 

ATESH-GAH, fire-place, 392, 394, 413- 

ee ds reference to pillars in, 
395- 

ATI-BHANGA, excessive flexion, a pose, 
155- 

ASvATTHA, in Buddhist images, 146. 

AtisHA, Indian Pandit who restored 
Lamaism in Tibet and established the 
Gelupga order of monks, 283. 

ATMARTHA, class of phalli, 140. 

Atri, authority on architecture in 
Matsya-Purdna, 245. 

— thrown in a machine room, 403, 
412. 

ATTALIKA, edifice, 96. 

Artic, class of Graeco-Roman doors, 
234. 

AUPUNISHUDADHIKARA, treatise attribu- 
ted to Kanchumara, 9. 

AvAcHCHAYA, light shadow, 100. 

AVANTIPUR, temples of, 289. 

AVANTIVARMAN, who built temples of 
Avantipur, 289. 

Avarya, authority on architecture in 
Manasara, 155, 0. 2, 246. 

AyYADANA, a place of worship, 392. 

AyAot, architectural formulas of mea- 
surement, 86, 140, 141, 146. 

AyYMONnirR, E., 339. 

AyupHALAYA, arsenal, 124. 


AyuTHIA, temple at, 325. 


B 
BABHRU (MUSHTIKA), a Class of octago- 
nal buildings in Garuda-Purdna, 191. 
BABYLON, no direct influence of, on 
Indian art, 377. 
Bacouus, temple suited to, 225. 


Bapamti, temples at, resembling Cham 
structures, 337. 

BAHAR, stipa of, similarities with Mauri- 
Tim and Kurghan-Tim stipas, 296. 

Bantg-SALA, outer part of palaces, 124. 


455 


INDEX 


Baurr-BHUSHANA, external ornaments, 
certain articles of furniture, 134, 


135- 

Mtns, phalli in a group, 140. 

BAHULYA, a moulding, 203, 230. 

BAKHENG (MouNT), temple at, 339. 

Baxone, temple of, 339. 

Baku, temple of, 339. 

Ba(VA)LABHI, .a class of rectangular 
type of buildings, 1go. 

BALAGRA, a measurement, 98. 

BALA-KRIDANAKA, making dolls for 
children, or juvenile sports, 17. 

BALANCE, see TULA. 

BALA-PARYANKA, small couch, 99, 128. 

BALA-PATTA, 135, N. 2. 

Ba(Va)xayaA, a class of round type of 
buildings, 190. 

Batzt, a kind of Sumatran building, 
350- 

Bau, native Kampongs, 352. 

— people still Hindu, 351. 

— ruins of Hindu temples, 352. 


BALIKARMA-VIDHANA, the offering to 


gods in connexion with constructing 
a building, 102. 


BALo, Vihdra at, 315. 

BAna-SALA, castle, 93. 

HANBANGY, a pagoda, 318. 

BANEPA, one of the four chief cities of 
Nepal, 285. 

BAneER]I, R. D., ix. 

Banc An, Cham temple at, 330, 331. 

BANGKOK, temple at, 325. 


BanreaAt Keprr, Cambodian temples 
at, 340. 

— Buddhist temple built by Rajendra- 
varma 339. 

BanrEat TA Kean, temples at, 339. 

Baroun, pyramid temple of, 339, 340. 

— richness and beauty of carvings at, 


345°. 
— situation of, 344. 
Barout, temple at, 261. 
Barnett, Dr. L. D., 433- 


BASES (ADHISHTHANA), in Mdnasdra and 
Agamas, 204. 

— in Manasara and Vitruvius, 228. 

Bast1, a class of Southern Jain architec- 
ture, 77. 

Basu, R. N., acknowledgment of help 
received from, xxXvi—xxvii. 

Batu, hot air, an open-air tank for, 73. 

BAUDDHA-LAKSHANA, Buddhist images, 
146-147. 

— materials and measurement of, 147. 

— postures of, 146. 

BaupHAyana, full particulars of altars 
in, 392. 

Bayon, Brahma masks at the temple of, 


44. 
— a hundred years required for cons- 
truction of, 343. 


— consecrated by Indravarman or 
Yasovarman, 339, 343. 

-~— double course of sculptured corri- 
dors in, 343. 

— great temple of, 339, 340, 343- 

— occupied by priests only, 346. 

— plan of, 343-344. 

BEpsA, caves at, 378. 

— pillars at, and their capitals, 382. 

BELGIEA, fort of, 351. 

BELUR, temple of, 260. 

BENARES, temple at, 261. 

BENCHES, in Buddhist age, 73. 

Benc MEALEA, Hindu temple at, 344. 

— one of the largest temples of Cam- 
bodia, 341. 

— palaces at, 346. 

— special features of, 344. 

— situation of, 344. 

BERANGULA, a kind of angula measure- 
ment, 145. 

Berosus, absence of gods and goddesses 
in Persia, affirmed by, 395- 


Berra, a class of Southern Jain archi- 
tecture, 77. 


BHADDA PITHAM, state chair, 74. 

BHADRA, a moulding, 204. 

— balcony, 127, 130. 

— class of buildings in Kamikdgama, 
195- 


456 


INDE 


BuaprA, front porch, 120, 187. 

— pavilion used as a water reservoir, 
store house, etc., 120. 

— type of square buildings, 1go. 

BHADRALOKA, temple of, 360. 

BHADRA-PITHA, a Class of pithas (pedes- 
tals), 141. 

BHADRASANA, type of throne, suited to 
Pattabhdj, 129. 

— — sitting posture, 154, n. I. 

BHAGAVATA-PuRANA, referred to by 
Bana, 277. 

BHAGA-PANGHA, Class of halls, 404. 

Buarrava, class of phalli, 139. 

BuarrAvi, one of the seven mothers, | 
142. | 

BHAKTA-LAKSHANA, image of devotees, | 
148-9. 

BHANDARKAR, Sir, R. G., 237, 274. 

—- on the language of Manasara, 439. 

BHANGA, pose of idols, 138. 
— three, 155- 

BHANu, authority on architecture, in 
Manasara, 155 n.2, 246. 

BHARA (or Hara), a moulding, 203, 
230. 

BHARADVAJA, one of the seven sazes, 
image of, 14.7. 

BHARATA-MUNI, quoted by Bhattotpala, 
243. 

Buarcava, V. M., acknowledgment 
of help received from, XXVii. 

BHARGAVA, an authority on architec- 
ture, 172. 

— one of the seven sages, image of, 
147+ 

BHASKARA, an authority on architec- 
ture, 243, 245. 

— or Bhaskaracharya, author of 
Lilavatit and Siddhanta--Siromant, 245. 

— sculptor, 96. 

BHATGAON, many shrines at, 284, 285. 

— Bhavani temple at, 286. 

BHATTOTPALA, commentator of Brthat- 
samhita, 243. 

BHAVANA, a class of rectangular type 
of buildings, 190. 

BHAVANAKANTA, a Class of ten-storeyed | 
buildings, 116, 189. 


| 
a 
| 
| 


» 


457 


x 


| BHAVANI, temple of, at Bhatgaon, 286. 
BHAVISHYA-PURANA, architectural 
matter in, 83. 
— compared with Manasara, Brihat- 
Samhita, etc., 248. 
identical with Matsya-Purana and 
poe i: in certain matters, 244, 


_- atta to twenty kinds of build- 
ings in, 207. 

— relation of indebtedness 
Manasara, 240. 

— types of buildings compared with 
other Puranas, Brihat-samhita, Agamas 
and Mdnasara, 195-196. 


with 


| — — identical with Matsya-Purana and 


Brihat-samhita, 192. 


| — — in, 192-193. 


Buittt, foundation wall or floor, 119. 


| BuoGa, a kind of single-storeyed build- 


ings, 114, 187. 

BuoyaDEva, king of Dhara, Manasara 
attributed by Pandits to, 429. 

— author or patron of Samarangana- 
siitradhara, 178. 

BHOJANA-MANDAPA, dining hall, 124. 

Buricu, an authority on architecture, 
172, 245. 

—oone of the 
of, 147. 

— one of the sources of Samgraha, 183. 

BurisA, 125. 

Buu-DEvi, Earth-goddess, 138. 


seven sages, image 


BHUpHARA, a class of oval type of 
buildings, 190. 
BHOKANTA, a class of ten-storeyed 


buildings, 116, 189. 

— of eight-storeyed buildings, 115, 189. 

Buomika (in Garuda-Purdna, for Bhi- 
shana of Agni), a class of oval build- 
ings, IgI. 

— storey, I9I, 192. 

BuHUMI-LAMBA, dimensions of storeys, 
114. 

— height of storey, 224. 

BHUMI-SAMGRABA, selection of site, g9- 
100, 219. 

BHUMISPARSA-MUDRA, an attitude of 
hand, 3o1. 


BHUPAKANTA, a Class of eight-storeyed 
buildings, 115, 189. 


INDEX 


BuOPaARIKsHA, examination of soil, 99- 
100, 219. 
BHUPALA-LAKSHANA, 
kings, 125. 
BuUPATI-VALLABHA, See MANDANA. 
BuupatinDRA Matta, king of Nepal, 


286. 
BuisHana, a class of nine-storeyed 


buildings, 116, 189. 

— of oval types of buildings, 190. 

BHUSHANA-LAKSHANA, ornaments and 
furniture, 133-137. 

BHUSHANALAYA, house to keep orna- 
ments in, 124. 

BHUSHANA-YOJANA, art of putting on 
ornaments, g. 

Buora, used as decorative designs, 128. 

BHUTAKANTA, a class of five-storeyed 
buildings, 115, 188. 

BHUVANA, see BHAVANA. 

SEN aa almost entirely astylar, 
262. 

— belong to a distinct style, 262. 

— early type of Stkhara, 262. 

— temples at, 261. 

BIMBAMANA, ayigula measure in, 198. 

— reference to twelve-idla measure- 
ment, 199. 

BrmpisArA, builder of Rajagriha, 65, 
Nn. 2. 

BiInH LAM, Cham temple at, 330. 

Bir-xor, architectural remains at, 315. 

— hill, fortification, and towers at, 


characteristics of 


15. 
tetas) T. B. W., acknowledgment of 
help received from, xxvi. 
BLACKETT, Sir Basix, 418. 
BopAuHPAYA, commenced Mingun- 
paya, 319. 
Bopu-Gaya, 406. 
— imitation of temple at, 321. 
BopuHIKA, name of a moulding, 202, 
203, 204, 230. 
Bopuisattva, images of, in Rawak 
ruins, 301. 
— in mural paintings of Caves of 
Thousand Buddhas, grr. 
— of Valley of Myriad Buddhas, 313. 
— who visited Nepal, 285. 


BoDHNATH, a chaitya, in Nepal, 287. 

BoHTLINGK, 416. 

BornEO, geographical position, size, 
inhabitants of, 352. 

— inscribed stones and pillars found 
at, 352. 

Boro Bupwr, 318, 334, 338. 

— Buddhist monument to 
Buddha’s ashes, 354. 

— date and builder of, 355. 

— erected by Mahayanists, 354-355. 

— fundamental formative idea of, 355. 

— galleries in, 356, 357- 

— plan, form of structure, etc. of, 356- 


357: ie ‘ 
— present condition of site of, 356. 


— primary construction of, 356. 

— resemblance of, with cells of Mamal- 
lapuram, 355- 

— stairways of, 357. 

— wealth of sculptures of, 355-356, 
357- 

Bot, Siamese temples, of, 325, 326. 

— Siamese equivalent of Thein (q. z.), 


shelter 


321. 

— two at Vat Jai, 327. 

BowA-KAMBAR, Ziarat of, 299. 

Bower, CoLoneL, discovery of birch- 
bark codex by, 294. 

BrAHMA, architecture described by, 157. 

— attributes of, 138. 

— colour of the body of, 138. 

— comparative negligence to, in Mdana- 
Sara, 2'70-273. 

— four heavenly architects originated 
from, 246. 

— head-dress of, 132. 

— image of, 138. 

— in Myson group of temples, 332. 

— in temple of Java, 358, 359. 

one of Indian triad, 137, 138. 

origin of architecture from, 213, 234. 

prayer to, in Mdanasdra, 213. 

BRAHMA-BHAGA, the lower part of phal- 
lus, 141. 

BRAHMA-DESA (BURMA), architectural 
history of, 317. 

— borrowed Indian architecture, 317. 

— early adopted Buddhism, 317. 

— geographical boundaries of, 317. 


—- 


458 


INDEX 


BrAHMA-DESA (BURMA), monasteries in, 
322. 

— pagodas in, 318-321. 

— residential buildings in, 322. 

— situate in Brahma-sthana, centre of 
world, 317. 

BRAHMA-KANTA, a Class of three- and 
five-storeyed buildings, 115, 188. 

— class of gate-houses, 118. 

— order of columns, 110, 201. 

— — in Manasara, 228. 

BRAHMA-MANDIRA, a Class of rectangular 
type of buildings, 1go. 

BRAHMAN, authority on architecture, 
172. 

— in Matsya-Purdna, 245. 

BrAuHMANS, leadings position of, 329. 

BRAHMANDA-PURANA, architectural mat- 
ter in, 83. 

— belongs to the Gupta period, 278. 

— references to a/gula measure in, 198. 

— -— tala measurement in, 199. 

BRAHMANI, one of the seven mothers, 
142. : 

— image of, 142, 144. 

BRAHMA-PITHA, shrine, 124. 

BRAHMA-SILPA, one of the treatises 
drawn upon by Sarigraha, 184. 

BRAHMA-STHANA, central square, 122, 
124. 

reread en ese architec- 
tural matter described in, 83-84. 

BRAHMA-YAMALA, one of the sources 
of Samgraha, 184. 

BrRAuMi, inscription in Valley of Myriad 
Buddhas, 313. 

— script, 307. 

BREADTH of a house, of five kinds, 121. 

Briwces, in Cambodia, 346, 347. 

— of stone, in Ceylon, 293. 

Brinaspati, development. of architec- 
ture through, 213. 

BRIHAT-SAMHITA, compared with Pura- 
nas, ArthaSastras, Manasara, 244-251. 

— comparison with Mdnasara, 241- 


Bao: wax 

— eight mouldings in, 203, 230. 

— identical with Matsya-and Bha- 
vishya-Puranas in certain matters, 


244, 249- 


BRIHAT-SAMHITA, identical in certain 
matters with Matsya- and Bhavishya- 
Puranas, 83, 84. 

— improved readings in, 248-249. 

— mention of styles of architecture 
in, 206. 

— probable date of, 241. 

— reference to azgula measurement 
in, 198. 

— — Dravida style, 207. 

— — fala measurement in, 199. 

— — twenty kinds of buildings in, 207. 

— relation of indebtedness with Ma@na- 
Sara, 240. 

— short description of, 84. 

— similarities with Manasdra, 241-242. 

— the five orders in, 201, 228-229. 

— twenty types of temples in, 193- 


194. 

— types of buildings in, 193, 194. 

— — compared with Puranas, Agamas 
and Mdnasara, 195-196. 

— — identical with Matsya and Bha- 
vishya-Purdnas, 192, 193- 

BritisH, attitude to Indian arts and 
letters, 415-417. 

BuppHA (see #BAUDDHA-LAKSHANA) 
colossal image of, 312. 

— Dhyani, 354-355- 

— images in Siam, 325. 

— immense statue at Vat Si Jum, 
326. 

— in Caves of Thousand Buddhas, 
309-310. 

— in Miran, 307. 

— in Ti-chia-po-fu-no Convent, 299. 

incarnation of Vishnu, 269, 273. 

legend of its origin, 299. 

of Valley of Myriad Buddhas, 313. 

— representation of, 311. 

small and colossal images of, gor. 

statue in Boro Budur, 357. 

—in Mendoet Tjandi, 358. 

in Ananda temple, 320. 

— 15-feet statue of, in Gal-Vihara, 
292. 

— 46-feet long statue of, 292. 

BuppHADUTA, spiritual adviser of Vija- 
yavirya, of, 298. 

BuppHAPADA, small pavilions, in Siam 
to hold Lord’s footprints, 326. 

BuppHI-sAMKiRNA, Class of halls, 404. 


459 


INDEX 


BuppuisM, decadant, but tolerated in 
time of, Manasdara, 270. 

— declining under Chalukyas, 274. 

— introduction of, in Tibet, 283. 

Buppuisr art, objects divided into five 
groups, 67-69. 

— buildings, extensiveness and length 
of time in construction of, 69. 

— chariot, 128. 

— indifferently treated in Madnasara, 
268-270. 

— temples, 115, 117. 

— to be built outside villages and 
towns, 269. 

BUHLER, Dr. G., 237, 266, 278. 

— on the language of Manasara, 439. 
BuiLpincs, assigned to persons of diffe- 
rent ranks, in Mdanasara, 224-225. 

— —in Vitruvius, 225-226. 

— rarity of, before sixth, seventh cen- 
turies, 258. 

— twelve-storeyed, names of geogra- 
phical origin, 254-256. 

BuneER, stipa of Takhtaband in, 296. 

BupayA, earliest circular pagoda at, 
318. 

BurcEss, on Persian style in Indian 
buildings, 378. 

Burma, proper, included in Syama- 
deSa, 316. See BRAHMA-DESA. 


C 
CaBan, ancient capital town of Vijaya, 


336. : 

— fortifications at, 336-337. 

Carsar, patron of Vitruvius, the ear- 
liest known architect of Europe, 213, 
238. 

CacE, for various animals, 137. 

CALLIMACHUS, originator of Corinthian 
order, 202. 

Cameopi, building period in, 339. 

— Chinese conquest of, 338. 

— city of Angkor Thom in, 345-346. 

— features of the temples at, 340. 

— four architectural groups of temples 
of, 340. 

— geographical situation of, 338. 

— history of, 338-339. 

— included in Kambhoja-deSa, 316. 


CamsopiA, Indian origin of art of, 347. 

— introduction of Indian faith, letters, 
etc., to, 338. > 

— roads and bridges in, 346-347. 

— similarities with temples of Java, 


339. 

— skill of architects of, 347. 

— temples of, 341-345. 

Capita, bell-shaped, borrowed from 
Persia, 378. 

— of Indian pillars, 382, 386-387. 

Car (or Cuarior), decoration of, 128. 

— nine-storey high, 127. 

— of different classes of kings, 127-128. 

— of seven classes, 127. 

— with various number of wheels for 
different purposes, 127. 

CasTING, in wax, 155-156. 

CAVES OF THE THOUSAND BUDDHAS, 
309. 

— ground plan and general structural 

_ arrangement of, 310. 

— influenced by Ajanta and Ellora, 

¢ 313. 

— internal arrangement of, 310-311. 

— paintings in tempera in, 310. 

— rich in frescoes and stucco sculp- 
ture, 309. 

— two special temples, to shelter giant 
Buddha images, 309. 

— wooden galleries in, 310. 

— 515 grottoes, 309. 

CAVETTO, mouth or hollow, 203, 230. 

— identified with uitaroshtha, 230. 

CELEBEs, derivation of the name of, 


350- 

— inhabitants of, 350. 

— size of, 350. 

— peculiarities of the houses of, 350- 
351. 

— their resemblance to houses of 
Bengal villages, 351. 

CEMENT (VAJRALEPA), mentioned in 
Brihat-samhita, 84. 

— in Uttara-Rama-charita, 95. 

CENTRAL Asia, arts and architecture of, 


14. 

Be eddie and Brahmanical archi- 
tecture in, 295. 

— Indian civilization in, 294. 

— meeting place’of Indian, Chinese 
and Greek civilizations, 294. 


460 


INDEX 


CentraL Peace, Hall of, a hall in | Cuamt, Vedic vault or dome of solid 


the Forbidden City, 367. stone or brick, 57. 
Cerrs, temple of, 224. CHAmunpi, one of the seven mothers, 
CryLon, history of, 290. 142. 
— monuments of, 291-293. CHANDI, see TJANDI. 
Carr, in Buddhist age, 74. | CHaypirA, a class of nine-storeyed 
— ornamental wood carvings of, 314. buildings, 101, 116, 189. 
CHAITYA, antiquity of, 391. CHanpRA, authority on architecture, 
— authority on architecture, 155 n. 2, 172. 

246. 


— monumental building, 68, 93. 


| 
| CHANDRABHAGA, a canal in Java, 361. 
— resembles Christian church, 391. 


CuanpracuPtTa II, emperor, 274. 


CHaxora, cage for, 137. — Fa-hien’s visit to, 275. 
Cuaxra, discus, attribute of Vishnu, | religious conditions under, 275. 

138. CHANDRAKA-BHADRAKA, see INDRAKA- 
— a class of octagonal type of build- BHADRAKA, 

ings, 190, 191. CHANDRA-KANTA, a class of ten-storeyed 
CHAKRA-KANTA, a class of eleven- buildings, 116, 189. e 

storeyed buildings, 116, 189. — order of column in Suprabhed- 
CHAKRAVARTIN (SARVABHAUMA), class GL GE ROT) OR A2e, 

of kings, 124, 125, 126, 264, 404. CHANDRASALA, toproom, gable window, 
— head-dress of, 132. : IQI-192. 
— ornaments suited to, 134. CHARIOT, see CAR. 


— received tributes from all others, 264. | CHAru-BANDHA, a type of base, 204. 


=, throne for, 129. _ | Craruxa, a type of square buildings, 
CHALUKYAN architecture, characteris- 190 


5 go. 
tics of, 259-260. — — of Sala, 194. 
— mixed character of the style, 259. 


— style, 259-260. CHATAKA, rains-cuckoo, cage for, 137. 
— territory covered by, 259. CHATTERJEE, RaMANANDA, on Manasara 
CHALUKYAS, empire of, 267-268. architecture, XU, XV, 430. 
— periods of sovereignty, 274. CuarTurasra, four-cornered building, 
— religious conditions under, 274-275. 192. 
CHAMPA City, situation of, 335. CHATURASRA-SYENACHIT, falcon-shaped 
— design and plan of, 336. altar, 393- 
ay wall and gals of, 336. f CHATUR-MUKHA, a class of four-storeyed 
CHAMPA-DESA, architectural remains buildings, 115, 188. 
at, 330- . — — of villages, 102, 220, 398 
— cave temples in, 335. a oa aaa 
— first Indian king of, 329. — a pavilion of four faces, 120. 
— five-fold classification of monu- | — a storeyed mansion with four faces, 
ments of, 330. 120-121. 


— fortifications of, 336-337. 
— geographical boundaries of, 329. 
— Hindu dynasties of, 330, n. 2. 


CuatusHKona, also called chaturasra, 
square type of buildings, 193-194. 


— history of, 329-330- CuatustaLA, four-storeyed buildings, 
— Indian origin of architecture and 115. 

sculpture of, 337-338. CuaumuKH, temple at Palitana and 
— inhabitants of, 329. Ranpur, 321. 


— one of the six ancient divisions of f 
peninsula, east of India, 316. Cxausa, citadel of, 336. 


—- sculptures in, 335. Cuanis, thatch, 56. 


461 


INDEX 


CHHALITAKA-YOGA, tricks, 16. 

CuuanpA, classification of buildings, 
105, 106, 113, 114, 187, 225. 

— class of doors, 234. 

— — phalli, 140. 

— Prakdra, 116. 

in Kamikdgama, 194. 

shape of pavilion, 120. 

CHHANDOGYA UPANISHAD, reference to 
angula measure in, 199. 

CHHANDO-JNANA, knowledge of metres 
or character reading, 16. 

Cuuipra, hole of the wheel, 127. 

CueEDI, identical with Chaitya of Nepal 
and Ysedi of Burma, 317, 327. 

CxrAo-tzv, Valley of Myriad Buddhas, 
3II. 

Cuicken Irza, ruined city and wall of, 
373: 

CHIEN-FO-TUNG, shrines of, 312. 

Cutan Batam, Maya manuscripts of, 
372. 

CHILDERS, 416. 

Cuna, absence of monumental build- 
ings in, and its causes, 362. 

— — individualistic traits in buildings 
of, 362, 363. 

— allotments of different-sized build- 
ings to people of different ranks in, 
367-368. 

— building materials in, 363. 

— difference between palaces 
dwelling houses in, 367. 

— Berens of stipas from tombs of, 

ae difference in architectural design 
of temple and palace in, 367. 

— pagodas of, 365-366. 

— polychromy, an essential part of 
architecture of, 362. 

— special features of Buddhist monas- 
teries of, 364. 

— Ting architecture of, 363. 

— types of temples in, 365. 

CHIN-ISE-TIEN, Chinese name for pavi- 
lion of seven phoenixes, 299. 

CuinTAMant, Dr. Sir C. Y., on Mana- 
sara architecture, xiii, 422. 


Curriez, 387, 394, 395) 401. 


— 


and 


| CuHirA, strip of bark-dress of Brahma, 
138. 

Crit, fire-altar, particulars of cons- 
truction, 63. 

Cuitor, temples at, 261. 

Cuirra, a class of octagonal type of 
building, 190. 

— not to be carved or 
§masana_ according to 
Brahmana, 58. 

— perfectly transparent glass, 138. 

CHITRA-JNANA, one of the treatises 
drawn upon by Sarmgraha, 184. 

CriTRAKA, authority on architecture, in 
Manasara, 155 n. 2, 246. 

CHITRA-KALPA, Class of ornaments suited 
to deities and universal monarchs, 
134. 

CHITRA-KARMAN, painting, 98. 

CHITRAKARNA, type of Indian column, 
110, 201, 202, 228, 229. 

CHITRAL, stipas of, 305. 

CuitRAsALA, art gallery, 191. 

CirrA-SARA, one of the sources of 
Samgraha, 184. 

CHITRA-STAMBHA, type of Indian 
column, 110, 201, 202, 228, 229. 

CuIrRA-TORANA, ornamental arch, 190. 

CuirrA-yoGa, various kinds of painting, 
8. 

CHouKAN, Preathong settled at, 338. 

Cuua Hane, cave of, 335. 

CuotpaA, kind of head-dress, for queens 
of praharaka and astragraha, 132. 

CripAMAni, crest-jewel, 134. 

CHUDHA-NAGARI, capital of Yavana- 
deSa, 316. 

CHULIKA, 135, n. 2. 

CHULLAVAGGA, references to architec- 
tural matters from, 73. 

Cuinam, a kind of plaster, 73. 

CHUTTAMUKK, (CHATURMUKHA), Svastika 
in plan, and sheltered statue of 
Brahma, 326. 

— type of building in Siam, 326. 

Cicero, testimony to absence of temples 
among Persians, 392. 


painted on 
Satapatha- 


462 


INDEX 


Crries described in Mahabharata, 79. Coste, 388. 
Crvi, ARCHITECTURE, the chief building | Coucues, of two sizes, 128. 
activity of Vedic Indians, 59. Courts, five in Manasara and Vitruvius, 


CuasstFicATIONn of buildings in Mdana- I, 116, 233. 
sara, 113-114, 186-189. Coy Luy, citadel of, 336. 
aes CU Columns 110: , CRESCENT, inserted in Siva’s head-dress, 
— of phalli, 139-141. | 139. 
— of pavilions, 119-120. 
Cosa Pee ce ae | Cricuton, Lizut.-Cot. D. W., acknow- 


= saree Aaperon | ledgment of help received from, XXy. 


Cocuin Cun, included in Kambhoja- | Crown, different kinds of, 131-132. 
dea, 316. Fe for various gods, and kings and 
Coxour, red for walls, black for floors | _ GUeens of various ranks, 132. 
in Buddhist buildings, 72. | CunnincHam Gen. Sir A., ix, 288, 
— of soil, gg. | 416. ’ ; 
Coxumns, antiquity and variety of Curzon, Lorn, Preservation of Ancient 


Monuments Act, 415. 


Cyma (or CyMA-RECTA or CyMatrum), 
a Graeco-Roman moulding, 203, 


Indian ones, 385. 
— base of Persian, 388-389. 
— capitals of, 382. 


— details of old Persian, 387-390. 230, 231. 
— free and its characteristic, 380 ff. — identified with padma, 230. 
— in Kdmikdgama, 88. 4 ] 
— in Matsya-Purdna, 81. , | Cyrus, who built palaces at Pasar- 
— measures and proportions of Hindu gadae, 460. 

ones, 385-387. — palace of, 388, 389. 
— of Grecian Doric type in Kashmir | — Statue of, 395: 

temples, 288. D 
— of Hindu-Corinthian type in Vai- 

dyanatha temple of Kangra, 290. DAcaA(co)BA, Chaitya, gor. 
— of Agoka and others, 381-383. — purpose of, 3gr. 


— Persian ones, 389-390. DarvikA, class of phalli, 140. 
— regulating and its characteristics, | Dara, a moulding, 204. 
380-381. 


— two broad classes of, 380. Datapa Maucawa, a Saiva temple, 
= 293- 
Comronrra, Grace Roman order of | DALAT Last 365, 
eater 201, 228, 231. — the first, built the Potala, 284. 
ConjJEEVERAM, temples at, 337. DAman, garland worn round the 


shoulders, 135. 


Dams BarTHI, ancient burial places 
at, 46. 


Coomaraswamy, Dr. A. K., 425. | 
CorINTHIAN, a type of Graeco-Roman 
Soruee ete order of column, | DamronG, Prince, 324. 
201, 227, 228. | Danpa, a class of building mentioned 
suited to delicate deities, 225. | in KF amikagama, 195. 
Gernce, of double curve, special | — amoulding in Suprabhed@gama, 203, 
| 


feature in Dravidian temples, 259. 230. 
Coronation, four stages of, 132. — staff, attribute of the seven sages, 
— the ceremonies performed at, 132- | 147: 


133. — unit of measurement, 98, 121, 


463 


INDEX 


DanpakA, class of villages, 102, 220, 
398. 

— a pavilion with two faces, 120. 

— stick-shaped storeyed mansion, 120. 

DanvAn-Uitig, Abhya-pani-mudra, in 
reliefs of, gor. 

— dania (or sikha), axle band, 127. 

— Sanskrit texts discovered at, 294. 

Darius, inscription of, 400. 

— palace of, 401. 

— restored temples to people, 392. 

Darius-Copomanus, king of Persia, 
390. 

Dartus-Notuus, entombed at Naksh-i- 
Rustem, 390. 

Darius-Hysrasres, throne-room of, 405. 

DARPANA, mirror, 135. 

— measurements, shape, polish, decora- 
tions of, 136. 

DARU, III. 

DArva, pavilion used as an elephant 
stable, 120. 


DASAKUMARACHARITA, where mention 
is made of a Manasara, king of 
Malava, 252, 281. 

— absence of anya rchitectural ref- 
erences in, 282. 

DASANA-VASANANGA-RAGA, staining of 
the teeth, dyeing of cloth, colouring 
of the body, 7. 

DaSa-TALA, ten-storeyed building, 115. 

— female deities measured in, 142. 

— system of measurement, 139, 142, 
145, 147. 

— three varieties of, 199. 


Dass, Lata Man Mouan, acknowledg- 
ment of help received from, xxvii. 

Darra-GAmini, king of Ceylon, 291. 

Davins, Ruys, 264. 

DawawisH, old Kafir house at, 304. 

Derecr in building in Vitruvius and 
Manasara, 236. - 

DEHA-LABDHANGULA, kind of ayigula 
measure, 198. 

DEHANGULA (or DEHA-LABDHANGULA), 
kind of angula measure, 145, 152. 

Drjocrs, palace of, 397. 


DEPUNG, monastery of, 284. 

DESA-BHASHA-VIJNANA, knowledge of 
languages of differertt countries, 15. 

Deva-purGA, God’s fort, 104, 221. 

DEvVA-KANTA, a Class of eight-storeyed 
buildings, 115, 189. 

DEVA-MANDAPA, class of mandapa in 
Suprabhedagama, 195. 

DEVAYATANA, temple, 80. 

DevasmHA, 361. 

Devotee, four classes of, 148-149. 

— measurement of images of, 149. 

DHAMMAYANGYI, temple of, 321, n. 2. 

DuAmMILLA, kind of head-dress, 132. 

DHANADA, see SARVAKAMIKA. 

LE NUE SHOE, a measurement, 
98. 


DHANURMUSHTI-HASTA, a Measurement, 
98 


‘DHANUS, a measurement, 98. 


DHANYAKATAKA, see AMARAVATI, 284. 

DwHARA, ground, 99, 218. 

DuArRA-(KumBuHA), a moulding, 204. 

DHARANA, a class of seven-storeyed 
buildings, 115, 188. 

DHARANA-MATRIKA, art of composing 
enigmatic poetry, 16. 

DHATU-GARBHA, relic chamber, Shiva 
Dagon holds relics of four Buddhas, 
319. 

DuATU-vADA, metallurgy, 13. 

D#HYANAS, IOI. 

DHYANAMUDRA, 
397- 

DuyAni-BuppHa, image in Abhayagiri 
stupa, 291. 

Drauiine, in Manasadra and Vitruvius, 
compared, 220, 

DrastyLos, type of temples in Vitruvius, 
225. 

Diana, temple suited to, 225. 

Dienc, plateau, temples of, 360. 

— absence of Vesara and Wagara styles 
in, 360. 

— the style of, 360. 

DirEvuLaFoy, 393, 397. 


pose of meditation, 


464. 


INDEX 


Dicua NikAya, kind of bath described 
in, 73- 
Dmsuit, K. N.,2495- 
Drnava, inscription of, 360, 361. 
Duypma, hand-drum, 143. 
Dipa-pANDA, lamp-post, 135. 
Dipra-TANTRA, one of architectural 
works drawn upon by Samgraha, 
185. 
Diravaméa, chronicle of Ceylon, 290. 
Drirteros, class of temples in Vitruvius, 
225. 
Dipti-sArA, one of architectural works 
used by Samgraha, 185. 
DispLUVIATUM, type of Graeco-Roman 
court, 233. 
Disposirio, arrangement, 219. 
Dota, swing, 135, 136. 
Dome, richly carved, over mandapas, 
special feature of Northern style, 261. 
Done Duonc, a group of Cham 
temples at, 330. : 
— Buddhist character of, 333. 
— history of, 333. 
— plan of, 332-333. 
Door, decorated with carvings, 123. 
— in Buddhist buildings, 71. 
— in Jati, Chhanda, and other classes 
of buildings, 123. 
— in Vitruvius and Madnasdra, 234- 


235. 

— measurement of, 123. 

— numerous dimensions, 123. 

— of double and single leaves, 123. 

— on four sides and corners of build- 
ings, 123. 

— their positions in walls, materials, 
123. 

Doric, class of doors in Vitruvius, 234. 


— Graeco-Roman order of column, 


201, 227, 228. 

— suited to temples 
Minerva, Hercules, 225. 

DrAvina, class of phalli, 140. 

— — pitha, 142. 

— — twelve-storeyed buildings, 189, 
254) 257- 


for Mars, 


DrAvIDA, country, 255-256. 

— octagonal-car, 127. 

— of hexagonal shape, 258. 

— style of architecture, 86, 112, 186, 
194, 195, 206, 207, 257, 263. 

Dravivian style of architecture, 337. 

— in Ceylon, 293. 

— temples of, 258-259. 

Dravya, material, 137. 

Droyaka, class of forts, 104, 221, 399. 

Drupapas, posts to which sacrificial 
victims were bound, 58. 

DunpusuI, a class of round type of 
buildings, 190, 191. 

Dura (or KALI), 142, 143. 

— image of, 143. 

— image propitiated with blood, 286. 

DvVADASA-TALA, twelve-storeyed build- 
ing, II5. 

DurVACHAKA-YOGA, art of mimicry, 12. 

DvARA-HARMYA, gate-house of the 
fourth court, 117, 233. 

DvARA-MANA-VIDHANA, height of the 
door, 144. 

DvARA-NAMA-VIDHANA, Measurement of 
doors, 123. 

DvARA-PALA (or YAKSHA), flanking en- 
trance of the Jetavana Vihara temple, 
292. 

—_ a Rawak, 301. 

— Nag-headed, in Wata-Da-ge, 293. 

DvAra-PRASADA, gate-house of the third 
court, 117, 233. 

DvAra-SALA, gate-house of the second 
court, 117, 233- 

DvARA-STHANA, location of doors, 122. 

DvAraA-SOBHA, gate-house of the inner- 
most court, II7, 233. 

Dvi-KANTA, a2 main pillar with two 
minor pillars, 110. 

Dv1-TALA, two-storeyed buildings, 115. 

Dvi-vajra, order of column in Matsya- 
Purana and Brihat-samhita, 201, 202, 
228, 229. 

DweE Luinc-HousEs, of Buddhist age, 70. 

— in Central Asia, 304-305. 

DyutTa-vKEsHA, art of various gamb- 
lings, 17. 


465 


INDEX 


E 

EcBATANA, City in Persia, 397, 399, 
413. 

Ecuinus (or Ovoto), aGr aeco-Roman 
moulding, 203, 230. 

EKHABHUMI-VIDHANA, 
buildings, 113. 

EKApa$a-TALA, eleven-storeyed build- 
ings, I15. 

EKA-KANTA, a main pillar with one 
minor pillar, 110. 

EKaALInGA, a class of phalli, 140. 

Extora, temple of, 260, 309. 

— its influence on, 313. 

— marks of destruction at, 416. 


one-storeyed 


ENDERE, ancient fortifications at, 298, 
301-302. ; 

— discoveries of Stein at, 294. 

— other buildings, 302. 


— ruins of fort, st#pa, and temple in, 


gol. 

— sculptures of, 301. 

— stiipa of, 303. 

— — shows all the essential stupa 
features, 296. 


— temple situated in the centre of, 302. 


— the cella of the temple of, 302. 

— the fort of, gor. 

ENTABLATURE, eight classes in Mdna- 
sara, 205- 

— Indian and Graeco-Roman, 228. 

Eran, pillar of Gupta age at, 382. 

ETAKA-PADAKA-PITHAM, chair raised on 
a pedestal, 74. 

EustyLos, type of temples in Vitruvius, 
225. 

F 


FA-HIEN, 299, 405, 4.06. 

— detailed description of king’s new 
monastery by, 296. 

— visit to India of, 275. 

— — Java of, 354. 

Fan, see VYAJANA. 

Fano, temple at, 240. 

Feminine, buildings, 114. 


FERGUSSON, xii, 285, 288, 284, 290, 
292, 293, 324, 328, 342, 343, 344, 
346, 347, 354, 365, 366, 377, 378, 
379; 382, 383, 391, 403, 412. 

FILLET (or LISTEL Of AMMULET), a 
Graeco-Roman moulding, 203, 230. 

— identified with tuld, upatuld, vdjana, 
ulfara, 230. 

Firroz SHAH, who removed Asokan 
pillar to Delhi, 38r. 

Fioors, in Buddhist buildings, 72. 

Fiora, temple suited to, 225. 

Fo, Buddha, 365. 

Forts, classifications of, 399. 

in Buddhist India, 65. 

in Central Asia, 304, 305. 

in Miran, 306-307. 

of eight classes in Mdnasdra, 220, 
221. 

— of Tibetan origin, 307. 

— plan of, 222. 

Fosse, Str CLAUDE DE LA, 425. 

Foucrer, M., 296. 

EON: laying of, in Mdnasara, 
226. 

— — in Vitruvius, 226-227. 

— of two classes of houses and temples, 
271. 

a= toes of, for four castes, 272. 

FOURNEREAV, 327. 


Frontivus, who mentions Vitruvius, 
210. 


FuNERARY structure in Vedas, 56-59. 
— three-types, 56. 

FurnNITuRE, in Buddhist Age, 73-75- 
— in Manasara, etc., 135-137- 

— ritualistic type of, 61. 

— Vedic, 59-62. 


G 


GasrE, tomb of, 390. 

Gap&A, mace, attribute of Vishnu, 138. 

— a class of octagonal type of build- 
ings, 190, IQI. 

Gaja, a class of oval type of buildings, 
190. 
—_— rains resembling an elephant, 

Igl. 


4.66 


INDEX 


GayaBauu I, king of Ceylon, 291. 

GAJABHADRA, Class of halls, 404. 

Gata (also GrivA, KanTHaA, Kan- 
DHARA), a moulding, 204. 

GaLa-kUTA, neck-peak, 118. 

GALA-VinARA, a rock-cut edifice in 
Ceylon, 292. 

Gamten, C. G. L., acknowledgment 
of help received from, xxvii. 

— designed artistic layout of cables in 
Svastika Mansion, xxi. 

GAyava, class of phalli, 140. 

GANDHA-MADANA, type of pavilion, 119. 

GanpHaARA, Graeco-Buddhist sculpture 
in, 301, 303. 

— Persian decorations of sarighardmas 
of; 377: 

GANDHARVA, images of, 148. 

GANDHA-YUKTI, perfumery, 9. 

GayrESA, image used as decorative, 
design, 123. 

— in Myson group of temples, 332. 

— in Siam, 328. 

— Javanese temples, 358, 359. 

GANGA, inserted in Siva’s head-dress, 
139. 

Gann, Dr., discovery of Coba by, xii, 
372, 373 374- 

GANNAMACHARYA, Mayamata ascribed 
to, 159, 161. 

GANYA-MANA, an architectural measure- 
ment, 200. 

GarsHA, adytum, 193. 

GARBHA-GRIHA, cella or sanctum, 118, 
140, 144, 152. 

— shrine, 114. 

GARBHA-NYASA, laying of foundation, 

226. 

GARBHAVINYASA-VIDHANA, the founda- 
tion, 106-108. 

GarGa, authority on architecture, 243, 
245. 

— in Matsya-Purdna, 245. 

GARGA-SAmMuHITA, architectural subjects 
referred to in, 94. 

GAreya, authority on architecture, 
172. 


, 


Garupa, a Class of oval buildings, 
IgI. 

— — seven-storeyed buildings with 
bird designs around, 198. 

— image of, 150. 

— ten-storeyed building, 192. 

— types of buildings in Bhavishya- 
Purana and Brihat-samhita, 192, 193. 

— vdahana of Vishnu, 150. 

GarupDA-PuRANA, architectural matter 
dealt with in, 82. 

— of direct influence with Agni-, 
Matsya-, and Bhavishya-Puranas and 
Brihat-samhita, 250. 

— relation of indebtedness with Mana- 
Sara, 240. 

— types of buildings compared with 
those of other Puranas, Agamas, 
Brihat-samhita, and Mdnasdra, 195. 

GarutmaT, a class of oval type of 
buildings, rgo. 

GATE-HOUSE, Classification of, 117-118. 

— in Manasara, 233. 

GauTaAMA, authority on architecture, 


172. 

— pF. Buddha, eight hairs of, 319. 

— the Magi destroyed temples of, in 
Persia, 392. 

GavAxsuA, perforated screen of cow’s- 
eye pattern, 118. 

Getupca, order of Lamas, the yellow 
caps, 283. 

Geya, class of buildings in Kamikagama, 
195. 

GHANA-MANA, 
ment, 200. 

Guana, solid, 118. 

Guata, identified with Talon, 230. 

— name of a moulding, 202, 203, 204, 
0. 

ae of buildings in Bhavishya-Purdpa 
and Brihat-samhitd, 193-194. 

GHATANA-SASTRA, science of accidents, 
15. 

GurITA-VARI, a moulding of pitha, 141. 

— part of the fitha, 141. 

Giri-DuRGA, mountain fort, 104, 221. 

Grrnar, temples at, 260. 


architectural measure- 


467 


INDEX 


Gira, vocal music, one of the sixty-four | GunarAja, type of building, 192-193. 
SNES GumpBatuna, small vihdra at, 315. 

Grass, see ABHASA, 137-138. 

Gnomon, as used in Manasdra and in 
Sirya-siddhanta, 253-254. 

GopHA(RA), cage for, 137. 

pepe ceuah an. Java, 3Or. | — style of architecture, characteristics 

GopALa, name of Vishnu, temples of, of, 279. 
in certain quarter, 272. 


| 
| 
G , A. C., acknowledgment of hel 
GopAna(KA), a moulding, 204. yee Agel pi hora P 
| 
| 


GupTA, so-called, really an earlier style, 
279-280, 

— style compared with buildings of 
Manasara, 279. 


received from, xxvi. 
Gopura, gate-house, 104, 114, 116, 117. 


GUPTA DYNASTY, 273-274. 

Goruram, gateway, special feature of | __ administrations of religious condi- 

Dravidian temple, 259. tions under, 275-276. 
GoPuRA-VIDHANA, gate-houses, 117. — architectural revolution under, 277. 
GRAHA-KUNDALA, see MAKARA-KUNDALA-| __ favourable conditions for arts and 
GRAMA-LAKSHANA-VIDHANA, village literature under, 278. 

schemes, 102, 220. — period of, has features required by 
Great Dracon, Temple of Heaven, Manasara, 275. 

a temple near Pekin, 363. Gupra-viiéa, in Manasdra, for Sapta- 
— plan of, 363-364. 


= ae vimsa, 278-279. 

RIHA-KANTA, a Class of five-storeyed t of Nepal by, 285. 

buildings, ine 188, GuRKHA, conquest of Nepal by, 205 

Gria-LaksuMi, guardian deity of the 
house, 122. 

GRIHA-MANA-STHANA-VINYASA, On situa~ 
tion and dimensions of a dwelling- 
house, 121. 

GrinAn, dwelling house, type of fune- 
rary structure, 56-57. 

GRIHA-PRAVESA-VIDHANA, the first 
entry into the House, house-warming 
ceremonies, 122. 

GrimarAyja, a class of rectangular type 
of buildings, 1go. 

— type of buildings in Bhavishya- 
Purana, 192. 

GRIHA-STAMBHA, central pillar, a pecu- 
liarity of Hindu architecture, xvii, 
395- 

GrivA, neck, 150. See Gawa. 

GRONEMAN, Pror. KERN, 355, 357- 


Gruss, FREDERICK, on Ménasdara archi- 
tecture, 432. 


GuvA-verixsna, (for Svavziksha of Agni, 
in Garuda-Purand), a class of round 
type of buildings, 191. 


GwWILT, 229, 231. 


Hapaway, 396. 

HA.eEsip, temple at, 342. 

Hatts, in India, 403-405. 

— in Persia, 400-403. 

Hamsa (Goose), class of oval type of 
buildings. 190, 192. 

— measurement of, 149. 

— palaces for, 149-150. 


— type of buildings in Bhavishya- 
Purana and Brihat-samhita, 193, 194. 


— vehicle of Brahma, 149. 


HAra, moulding, identified with astra- 
gal or torus, 204, 230-231. See also 


GRUNWEDEL, on Persian style in Indian BHARA. 

buildings, 378. — string of pearls worn round the 
GuEBER, fire-worshipper, 305. neck, 134. 
GuHA, underground building, 66-67. HARADEVI RAJAKULA, queen of Indra- 
— cave-houses, 414. varman, 333. 


468 


INDEX 


HarAppaA, account of, 37-45. _ HARSHA-VARDHANA, empire of, 268, 
— building styles at, 411. | 274 

— finds at, 381. | — predilection for Buddhism of, 276. 
— funeral structures, 40. | Hasta, unit of measurement, 113, 197, 
— seven layers and their finds, 38. | 144, 145. 


— temples, 42-43. HAsTA-LAGHAVA, prestidigitation, 9. 
— walls, 39, 4l. | Hasti-prisutuHa, a kind of single- 
— water reservoir, 39. |  storeyed buildings, 114, 187. 
Harz, lion, used as decorative design, |! Havett, E. B., x. 

128. HavIRDHANA, sacrificial store-room, 
HARGREAVES, H, on ManasaGra architec- 56. 

ture, Xill, 427. ; HEMAKUTA, type of pavilion, 11g. 
Hariya, antelope, attribute of Rud- | fercures, temple suited to, 225. 

ia eee hand Heroporus, on absence of temples in 
Say PVE 8 BADE ESO: Persia, 391, 392, 413; 397- 
HaRIPUNYAPURA, probable capital of | Houm-strr Cuatrya, built by Vijaya- 

SyamadeSa, 316, 322. | virya, 298. ; 
Harismua, of Simraum, conquered | — legend about its origin, 298. 
_Nepal, 285. | Hicuest Peace, Hall of, a hall in the 
farira, class of halls, 404. Forbidden City, 367. 


Harivji, pagoda at, earliest in Japan? | Himaja, a type of pavilion, 119. 


369. aii HimaxAnta, a class of seven-storeyed 
Harrivaméa, arts, living and practical buildings, 115, 188. 

in times of, 3. | Himavart, kind of temple in Supra- 
— — referred to in, 1. bhedagama 195. 


— learning of sixty-four arts in sixty- | Hinpuism, prevalent in Siam before 
four days by Krishna explained in, Buddhism, 328. 


2-3. — revival of, under the Guptas, 276. 
— reference to sixty-four arts, 2. | HinpusTHANI, on Ménaséra architecture, 
— used by Jiva-gosvamin, 2. 449. 


Harmya, building, 99, 104, 214, 414. | Hioun Tsanc, mention of Somoje and 

— class of buildings in Kamikagdma, legend of its origin by, 297, 298. 
195- — on temple of VaiSravana, 298, 299, 

—— masonry house, 80. 324, 382. : 

— noblemen’s mansions, 55, 59- — visited Kashmir, 287. 


— pompous type of storeyed buildings, Hopcson, 391. 
6 Ho Lat, temples of, 334. 


if 
— temple, 144, 152. Hotat, inscription, sixty-four kinds of 
HarMya-KANTA, a class of seven- buildings referred in, 207. 
storeyed buildings, 115, 188. Honan, Buddhist temple of, 365. 
Harmyva-GARBuA, large dining hall, 70. | — plan of, 365. 


Harrop, H. R., great interest taken Hora, astrologer, 329. 
by and acknowledgment of indebted- | Ho’ Raxuanc Berry, type of build- 


ness to, Xi, XV, XXV. ings in Siam, 327. 
HIARsHA-cHARITA, description of palace, | Ho’ Trat, sacred library, having no 
mandapa, sabhd, prapa, pragramsa, etc., surrounding private grounds in Bud- 
in, 93- dhist India, 65. 
— named after Harsha, 252. — type of buildings in Siam, 327. 


469 


INDEX 


Hos Qug, cave temples of, 335. 

HoysaLesvaraA, temple at Halebid, 
260. 

Hl, 319, 320. 

Hur-uin, author of Yini, 298. 

Hune Tuan, group of five temples of, 
334- 


HyPar-TuRos, class of temples in Vitru- 
VIUS, 225. 


I 
ICONOGRAPHY, 219. 


Ipot, classes and poses of, 138. 

— materials for, 137. 

— measurements of, 139. 

— of Brahma, Vishnu, 138. 

— of Siva, 139. 

— pedestals of, 139. 

Izyasu, mausoleum of, 370. 

Ikxsuu-KANTA, a class of six-storeyed 
buildings, 115, 188. 

In Ants, classes of temples in Vitruvius, 
225. 

Inpo-Aryan, close relations with Per- 
sians of, 376. See also NORTHERN. 

— order of Sikhara, 259. 

— style of architecture, 260. 


Inpo-Cormwruian, capitals, 314. 


InpRA, an authority on architecture 
mentioned in Mdénasara, 155 n. 2, 
246. 

— architecture, described by, 157. 

— developed through, 213. 

— image of, in Myson temples, 332. 

— name of a square in palace, 124, 

INDRAKA- (or CHANDRAKA-) BHAD- 
RAKA, Class of cars, 127. 

INDRA-KANTA, a class of four-storeyed 
buildings, 115, 188. 

— — gate-houses, 118. 

InDRAPURA, capital of Champa, Dong 
Duong situated in, 333. 

INDRAVARMAN, king of Champa, 333. 

— king of Cambodia, a great builder, 
339- 


Inpus VALLEY, care for the con- 
venience of the citizens, 49. 

— civilization in, 49-50. 

— Saivisrh in, 49. 

— Vedic knowledge of, 50-53. 

INSULINDIA, ix, XI. 

— significance of traces of Indian 
architecture in, 316. 

Ionic, a class of Graeco-Roman 
doors, 234. 

— Greco-Roman order of columns, 
201, 228. 

— suited to certain deities, 225. 

Irmoya, gables, 370. 

Tron piuars of Delhi, 378. See Lona. 

Isa-KANTA, a class of eleven-storeyed 
buildings, 116, 189. 

IsuTaKA, brick, 96, 111. 

IsuRMUNIYA, rock-cut temple in Ceylon, 
292. 

‘ISvara-KANTA, a class of four-storeyed 

* buildings, 115, 188. 

Irzas, migration of, 372. 


J 


JABADIEU, Java in Ptolemy’s geography, 
353- 

JAHANGIR who re-erected Allahabad 
pillar, 382. 

Jat, chariot, 128. 

— difference between Northern and 
Southern styles, 77. 

— essentially Hindu, 76. 

— indifferently treated in Mdnasara, 
268-270. 

— style of architecture, a variety of 
Indo-Aryan order, 260. 

teres ya 105 4 00775 

— territory of prevalence, 260. 

--- their temples to be built outside 
villages and towns, 270. 

— types of, 146. 

JAINA-LAKSHANA-VIDHANA, Jain images, 
144-146. 

JAmnism, decadant but tolerated in time . 
of Ménasara, 270. 

— popular in Southern Maratha 
country under Chalukyas, 275. 


470 


INDEX 


JALA-DHARA, drain, 141. 
JALA-DuRGA, water-fort, 104, 221. 
Javapvara, drain, 103, 123. 

JAaka, perforated screen, 118. 

JANARDANA (or VASUDEVA or ADI- 
VisHNU), name of Vishnu, temples 
of, 272. 

Janaxa, land of, ar. 

JANAKAS, videha, 254. 

— class of twelve-storeyed buildings 
for, 254, 257. 

JANA-KANTA, a class of eight-storeyed 
buildings, 115, 189. 

JANAKA-KANTA, a class of twelve- 
storeyed buildings, 116, 189. 

JENGAMes movable class of idols, 
138. 

JANGGAL, inscription, reference to re- 
construction of a Saiva temple in 
Java, 360. 

JANMAN (or PRATHAMA), a moulding of 
the pitha, 141, 204. 

Japan, Chinese origin of architecture 
of, 369. 

— civil architecture in, 370, 371. 

— dwelling-houses in, 371. 

— history of architecture in, 369. 

— no distinctive traits in different 
classes of buildings in, 370. 

— palaces in, 370. 

Java, kind of head-dress, 131. 

— suited to Brahma and Siva, 132. 

— to Rati, 132, 143. 

JaTajyoTa head-dress for the seven 
sages, 147. 

JAvTaAKA, illustrated in the mural paint- 
ings of Caves of Thousand Buddhas, 
3II. 

— sculptured in Sukhdlaya, 329. 

— representations from, in Boro 
Budur, 357. 

JatTA-mukuTA, head-dress of Brahma, 
138. 

JAtr, class of buildings, 105, 113, 114, 
187, 225. 

— — phalli, 140. 

— — prakara, 116. 

— in Kamikdgama, 194. 

— shape of pavilions, 120. 


JAVA, architectural remains in, 354. 
— artists invited from India to, 354. 
— Brahmanism in, before Buddhism, 


354- 
— Buddhist shrines in, 354-358. 
— connexion of India with, 353. 
— distribution of castes in towns in, 361. 
— drainage of rivers in, 360-361. 
— epigraphic references to Hindu 
buildings in, 360. 
— Hindu shrines in, 358-360. 
— Indian colonization of, 353. 
— reference to, in Ramayana, 353. 
— town-planning in, 361. 
Jaya, class of gate-houses, 118. 
JAYABAHA, class of halls, 404. 
JAYABHADRA, Class of mandapas in Supra- 
bhedagama, 195. 
JAYACHANDRA, king of Trigarta or 
Jalandhara, 289. 
JAYADA, a proportion in an architec- 
tural measurement, 105, 108, 200. 
JAYALA, pavilion, used as a summer 
residence, 120. 

JAYANTA, a quarter for temples of Ifa, 
272. 

JAYANTI, a moulding in Suprabhedagama, 
203, 230. 

JayvanTixa, kind of one-storeyed build- 
ings, II4. 

JAYAVARMAN, king of Champa, 338. 

— king of Cambodia, 338. 

JAYAVARMAN II, founded Cambodian 
kingdom and Angkor Thom, the 
capital, 338-339, 345- 

JETAVANARAMA, Stipa of, 291. 

JETAVANA-ViHARA, temple, 292. 

Jua, ManamanopapHyaya Dr. G. N., 
425, 428, 439. 

— on Manaséra architecture, xili, 428. 

JHUKHUN, 43-45. 

— date, 44. 

— lake-dwellers in Sindh, 44-45. 

— the remains at, 44. 

Jusva, of a balance, 136. 

Jiva-cosvAmin, describes sixty-four arts 
in detail, 1, 7, 8, 11, 14, 17, 12 D. I. 

Jor, hill dwellings traced at, 45. 

Juno, temple suited to, 225. 

Jvort(sH)-KANTA, a class of six-storeyed 
buildings, 115, 188. 


471 


INDEX 


K 
Kasut, Valley of, siupas in, 296. 
Karir, dwelling-houses of, 304. 


| KALYANA, 2 class of five-storeyed build- 
| 
— forts of, 305. | 
a- | 
| 


ings, 188. 
KAMALA (or KAMALAKSHA), Class of six- 
storeyed buildings, 115. 
‘ IKAMALA-AKSHA, a Class of six-storeyed 
KAaILasa, a class of three-storeyed buil buildings, 188. 
ings, 115, 188. oa KAMALANGA, a class of three-storeyed 
— — round type of buildings, 190-| _puildings, 115, 188. 
KAMANDAKIYA-NiTI, assigned to fifth 


gl. 
— kind of temple in Suprabhedagama, century A.D., 251 
.D., 251. 


195. aa : ape 
— of eight-storeyed buildings, 192— | rier ties aa crave 
Hae Pers athe. x0 | — Manasara indebted to, 208. 

- a Biataa | — passages identical with Sukraniti’s, 
KAxkaul, a kind of plant, 107. 


Pays 251. 

KAKASHTA, crow-shaped seat, 99. KAMANDALU, painting in Miran stipa 

KaKUsANDHA, a previous Buddha, walls, 309. 
staff of, 319. 

Kawa-I-KAaxa, one of the three Kafir 
forts at Wakhan, 305. 

ae ah poison, mark of, in the 
neck of Siva, 139. res ; 

a = t ted ; 

ReaAero mA, class epg alli, 139. aye seven arts enumerated in 

KaxaSa (or Karaka), a class of round | — usefulness of the arts in, 18-19. 
type of buildings, 1g0—-191. 


KAma-suTRA, arts referred to in, |. 


— classification of arts in groups, 17—- 
18. 
— sixty-four arts specified in, 5. 


KAMBHOJA-DESA, one of the six ancient 


— finial over the amala-sila, 261. divisions of the peninsula east of 
— special feature of Nagara style, India, 316. 

261-262. KAMIKAGAMA, architectural subject 
Kazasan, temple of, 348, 360. systematically and extensively treated 
KAuayopa, authority on architecture | in, 85, 86-88. 

in Maasara, 155 n. 2, 245. — chapters enumerated, 86—88, 105. 
KAxi, image in temples of Java, 358- | — description of twenty kinds of 

359. See DurcA. buildings in, 207. 

KAmAsa, references to architectural | — details of ‘dla measures taken from, 

details in works of, 95. 200. 

Kauitca, a class of twelve-storeyed | — general description of bases in, 204. 
buildings, 254, 257. — reference to three styles of 

— astyle of architecture mentioned erCRu ec Lue oe 207s Z 
in epigraphical records, 206, 207. — elation of indebtedness with 


Manasara, 24.0, 437. 


ee re es 25 7- — scanty details about pedestals in, 


— country of, 256. 


205. 

— oval car of, 127. — types of buildings in, 194-195. 

— stipas of, 291. — — compared with those of Puranas, 

KALINGA-KANTA, a class of twelve- Briha!-samhita, Manasara, and 
storeyed buildings, 116, 189. Suprabhedagama, 195-1096. 

KauincapurA (modern Topava or | Kampa (or Kampana), fillet, a mould- 
Polonnaruva), ruins of, 292. ing, 109, 141, 204. 

KALPA-VRIKSHA, ornamental trees, 130, | KAMPA-BANDHA, a type of bases, 109, 
131, 132, 139. 140. 204. 


472 


INDEX 


KAMPA-KARNA, a2 compound moulding, 
204. 

Kamponcs, im Bali, 352. 

— in Celebes, 350. 

Kamya, class of prakara, 116. 

KANARAK, temple at, 261. 

KANDAG VALLEY, vihdra at, 315. 

Kanora, temples in, 289-290. 

KANGU, 107. 

KaniIsHKA, who sent missionaries to 
Siam, 322-323. 

Kanxacuit, heron-shaped altar, 393. 

KANKANA, a bracelet, 134. 

KANTAKA, class of two-storeyed build- 
ings, I15. 

KANnTARA, a class of six-storeyed build- 
ings, 115, 188. 

KanTua (or GALA), moulding in Supra- 
bhedagama, 203, 230. 

KaANDHARA (or GALA), a moulding of 
the pitha, 141. , 

KAaPpINJALA-SAMHITA, one of the treatises 
drawn upon by Samgraha, 184. 

Kapora, a moulding, 204. 

KARADONG, ancient fortifications at, 
299. 

KARE OARA, jail, 125. 

KARAKA, see KALASA. 

KARANAGAMA, architectural matter 
technically treated in, 88-89. 

— chapters enumerated, 89-90. 

— details of tala measure taken 
from, 200. 

— similarities with Mdnasdra, 89. 
KaranpA, head-dress for all female 
deities, chakravatin, narendra, 132. 

— for Garuda, 150. 

— for semi-divine beings, 148. 

— details of, 131. 

Kara-sHAHR, shrines and temples at, 
313-314. 

Kari, elephant, used as decorative 
design, 128. 

Karxora, builders of vihdras and tem- 
ples in Kashmir, 287. 

Karte, pillar at, and its capital, 382. 

SAREE a class of villages, 102, 220, 
399. 


KARNA, a moulding, 204. 

KARWYA-PADMA, a compound moulding, 
204. 

KARNA-PATRA-BHANGA, painting upon 
cheeks, 9. 

KarnikAra, class of halls, 404. 

Kasumir, history of, 287. 

— religious conditions in, 287. 

— temples of, 287-289. 
Kassapa, a previous Buddha, bathing 
garment of, in Shwe Dagon, 319. 
K&Syapra, chapters borrowed from, in 
Samgraha, 182. 

— colour, measurement and image of, 
147. 

— Fi of the seven sages, 109. 

Kataka, armlet, 134. 

Rae capital of Nepal, 284, 
285. 

— pitta of Pagupati near, 286. 

KatTi-sUTRA, cord round the loins, 135. 

Kato Kyomasa, built the castle of 
Kunamoto, 371. 

Katyu, Hon’ste Dr. K. N., acknow- 
ledgment of help received from, xxvi. 

KaucHUMARA-yoGA, a fine art, 9. 

Kaumarr, one of the seven mothers, 
142. 

Kaine one of the treatises drawn 
upon by Samgraha, 184. 

Kaunpiyya, first Indian kings of 
Champa, 329. 

Kau$atya, class of halls, 404. 

Kauégixa, pavilion used as a horse 
stable, 120. 

Kavi, chronicles, 353. 

KAVYA-SAMASYA-PURANA, solution of 
verbal puzzles, 12. 

Kepu, 354. 

Kerry, Dr. A. B., on Manasdra archi- 
tecture, xili, 425. 

KenprRA, a moulding, 204. 

KENNEDY, 376. 


KERALA, a Class of twelve-storeyed build- 


ings, 116, 189, 254, 255, 257: 
KESABANDHA, head-dress, suited to 
Sarasvati and Savitri, 132. 
— for queens of adhiraja and naren- 
dra, 132. 


473 


INDEX 


KESAKUTAKA, 135, Nl. 2. 

KxSA-MARJANA-KAUSALA, art of hair- 
dressing, 14. 

Ke§arA, a kind of single-storeyed build- 
ings, 114, 187. 

— of three-storeyed buildings, 115, 188. 

Kréava (or NARAyANA), name of 
Vishnu, 272. 


KEVALA-NAGARA, Class of towns, 104, 399. 


Keyora, armlet, 134. 

KwApatik, resembles Hindu temples, 
06. 

eT ie of, 306. 

Kuanea, a class of octagonal buildings, 
IQgI. 

KauajurAno, temples at, 260, 261. 

KHAROSHTHI, inscriptions, 307. 

— in shrines, as proof of their Indian 
origin, 306. 

— manuscript in, 294. 

— tablets in, 305. 

KarvaTa, a class of towns, 104, 106, 
220, 399- 

Kuasa, a Tibetan Lama, Budhnath of 
Nepal ascribed to, 287. 

KwAra-SANku, wooden stakes, ror. 

Kueta, a class of towns, 104, 220, 399. 

KumeR, civilization of, 323. 

— Dravidian inscription of, 324. 

Kuora, Buddhist shrine, 314. 

Kuoran, a special civilization of its 
Own, 295. 

— Buddhism _ established 
India, 294. 

— find of M. Rhins at, 294. 

— under Chinese supremacy and 
influence, 295. 

— Tibetan influence, 295. 

Kuvonc My, Cham temple at, 330. 

Kicuinuix, abhaya-mudra in reliefs of, 
gol. 

Kia, axle-bolt, linch-pin, 127. 

Kinos, nine classes of, 125, 264. 

— the nine-fold division pre-sup- 
poses an empire, 265. 

— wee crowns, thrones and revenue, 
126. 

— their qualification, 125. 

— their respective possessions, 125. 


in, from 


Kine’s New Monastery, described by 
Fa-hien, 296. 

— description of, 296-297. 

— identified with Somoje convent of 
Hiouen Tsang, 297. 

— of wood, 297. 

— situated west of Khotan capital, 
296. 

— took 80 years, 296. 

KuNKINI-VALAYA, bracelet and anklet, 
fitted with little bells, 134. 

Kinnara (Kinnari), images of, 148. 

— used as decorative designs, 130. 

Kioto, imperial palace at, its plan and 
arrangement, 370-371. 

Kir AGRAMA, Village in Kangra, Vaidya- 
natha temple in, 289. 

KiRANA-TANTRA, eight mouldings in, 
203, 230. 

— five classes of columns in, 228-229. 

Kirt Dacasa, 292. 

Krrita, kind of head-dress, 31, 134. 

— suited to Narayana, Chakravartin, 
Adhiraja, 138. 

KisHKU-HASTA, a measurement, 98. 

KODRAVA, 107. 

Kona, 106. 

Koxaka, a class of forts, 104, 221, 399. 

Kowa, class of buildings in Kamikdgama, 
195; 

KOoNAGAMANA, a previous Buddha, 
water-dipper of, 319. 

Kwnonow, Dr. STEIN, 4.25. 

Korea, development of wooden cons- 
truction in, 369 

— origin of Japanese 
from, 369. 

KosuTHa, chamber, 106, 136. 

KosHTHAGARA, a class of Buddhist 
chaityas, special features of, 287. 

KosHTHA-STAMBHA, a kind of pillar, 
pilaster, 110, 201. 

Koran, architectural remains at, 315. 


Kora Rant, widow of last king of 
Kashmir, 287. 


architecture 


474 


INDEX 


Koret, state of Borneo, inscribed stone 
pillars found at, 352. 

Krisuna, of the style of the Plains, 
especially Bengali type, 286. 

— temple of, at Patan 286. 

KrryvAVIKALPA, derivation and con- 
jugation of verbs, 16. 

Krom, Dr., 360. 

KsHemA, class of buildings in Kamtk- 
agama, 194. 

KsHEepanaA, a moulding of the pitha, 
I4I, 204. 

KsHEPANAMBUJA, a compound mould- 
ing, 204. 

KsHUDRA-KAMPA, a compound mould- 
ing, 204. 

KsuupRA-NAsi, vestibule, 118, 130. 

KsHUDRA-PADMA, a compound mould- 
ing, 204. 

Kuan-Yin, goddess, worshipped by 
women, 365. 

KupjaKA, a class of towns, 104, 220, 
399- 

Kusiat Kuan, who destroyed Pagan, 
317+ 

KucwA, discovery of Bower Manus- 
cripts from, 294, 299. 

KupYA-sTAMBHA, pilaster, 109, 201. 

KucHuMARA, originator of Kauchumara- 
art, 9. 

KuxxuTA, cage for, 137. 

KuKKUTA YUDDHA MANDAPA, pavilion 
to witness cock-fights from, 124. 

Kuxsut, nave of wheel, 127. 

KUKSHI-BANDHA, a type of bases, 109, 
204, 

KuLA-DHARANA, pavilion used for stor- 
ing perfumes, 120. 

KuLALA, cage for, 137. 

KULATTHA, 107. 

KuMAL, opening in the centre of the 
roof, 304, 

KumArA, authority on architecture in 
Matsya-Puradna, 245. 

KumaAracupTsA, Emperor, religious 
beliefs of, 275. 


KuMBHA, a moulding, 204. 

— in Suprabhedagama, 203, 230. 

— nine-storeyed building resembling 
water-jar, 192. 

KUMBHA-BANDHA, a type of bases, 109, 
204. 

KuMBHA-STAMBHA, typeof Indian 
column, 110, 201, 202, 228-2209. 

KuMBURIEN, 326. 

— three at Vat Jai, 327. 

KUMRAHAR, excavation at, 379. 

— hall at, ascribed to ASoka, 405. 

Kumupa, torus or astragal, a mould- 
ing, 204. 

KuMUDA-BANDHA, 2 type of bases, 109, 
204. 

KumuDA-KUNTALA, kind of head-dress 
for queens of Parshnika, Pattadhara, 
etc., 132. 

Kunpaa (KunTALA), ear-ring, 134. 

— kind of head-dress suited to Saras- 
vati and SAvitri and Rati, 132. 

— to the queen of chakravartin, 132. 

KuwnpiKA, water-pot, attribute of Brah- 
ma, 138. 

— of Sarasvati and Brahmani, 142, 
144. 

Kuftjara, type of buildings described in 
Bhavishya-Purana and Brihat-samhiia, 
192, 193. 

KuNjARAxsHa, perforated screens of 
elephant’s eye pattern, 118. 

Kunyara Kuisya, imitation of shrine 
of, in Java, 360. 

Kufyariva, cage for, 137. 

Kurcuan-Tim, mound of, 295. 

— remains of stipa, 295. 

— similarities with Kabul Valley and 
Taxila stipes, 296. 

Kormoacuit, type of altars, 393. 

Kura, pinnacle, 120, 150. 

Kunamorto, castle of, 371. 

Kurrma, part of Madhyaranga, 1go0. 

KYANKTANGYI, temple of, having arch 
and vault, 320. 

KyansiutHa, who built Ananda and 
Nagayon temples, 320. 


475 


INDEX 


L 


LasRANG, monastery of, 283. 

Lac-Son, caves near, 335. 

Lacuu-SILpA-JYOTIH-SARA, on twenty- 
one things to be observed in con- 
nexion with building, 94. 

LAjA, 102. 

LAKE-DWELLERS, in Sindh, 45. 


LaKSHMANA CHANDRA, Vaidyanath 
temple of Kangra built under, 289. 
LaxsuMi, female energy, attendant on 

Vishnu, 138, 142-143. 

— image of, 143. 

— temples and images of, in Siam, 
325. 

Laxsumi-GovinpA, temple of, in Yajfia- 
$ala, xiv. 

LauirApiryA-MuxtTApipa, king of 
Kashmir, who built temple of Mar- 
tanda, 289. 

LALITA-VISTARA, arts referred to in, 1, 
3. 

— better knowledge of arts in time 
of, 4. 

— essential conditions for cultivation 
of arts, 4, 17. 

LAmaisM, 283. 

Lampa-MANA, kind of linear measure- 
ment, 144, 197. 

LampHuM, modern name of Haripunya- 
pura, 316, 322. 

LANGALA, shape of pavilions, 120. 

Laro Djonecrane (Tyanp1), date of, 
359- 

— virgin, Parvati temples of, in Java, 
358-359. 

— plan, sculptures; and carvings of, 
358-359: 

Laurrys-Araraj, Afokan pillar of, 381. 

LaurryA NAvanpcarH, Afokan pillar 
of, 382. 

LeacuE or Nations, Information Meu- 
suelles, on Mdnasdra architecture, 444. 

Le Bon, Dr., 382. 

LEMYET-HNA, a pagoda, earliest ex- 
ample of square temples, 319-320. 


Liane ANNALS, which mention frescoes 
pe onan royal palaces in Khotan, 
208. 5 

LicHCHHAVI DYNASTY, their inscriptions, 
and religion, came from Vaisali, 285. 

Lien, of the family of Kiu, foundation 
of kingdom of Champa by, 330. 

LixsHA, a measurement, 98. 

LiAvatTi, description of gnomon in, 
94-95: 

Linea of Siva, four-faced image of, 287. 

— in the Myson group of temples, 
332. 

— types of temples for, in Silpa-Sastras, 
306. 

LINGANGULA, berangula, 152. 

FESTA architectural matter in, 

3. 

LINGA-VIDHANA, phallus, 139-141. 

LisTEL, see FILLET. 

Lr-yuL, Annals of, 298. 

— legend about the temple of Vais- 
ravana, 298. 

— Tibetan version of the legend of 
the origin of So-mo-je convent, 298. 

Loca, clod, pole, also pillar erected on 
grave, 58. 

Lowa, iron, 131. 

Lowa-MAHAPAYA, Great Brazen Monas- 
tery, 291-292. 

LoxAjNA, authority on architecture, in 
ManasGra, 155 n. 2, 246. 

LoKANANDA, pagoda in Pagan, 318. 

pera attendant on Jain deities, 
146. 

Loxer, temple of, ascribed to YaSovar- 
man, 339. 

Loitum, cave of, 373. 

Lamasary, Buddhist monastery, 365. 

— distinguishing features of, 364. 

LoNLAN, wooden sti#pa models of, 308. 

LOPHABURI, temple at, 325. 

Lotus, attribute of Vishnu, 138. 

LupA, an architectural object, 113, 130. 

— sloping roof, 112, 120. 

Luanc PHRABANG, modern name of 
Chudha-nagari, 316. 


4.76 


INDEX 


M 

MAvDHUCHCHHISTHA-VIDHANA, first cast- 
ing of imagés, 155-156. 

MADHYA-DESA, 255. 

Mapuy4-HARA, middle court, 116, 233. 

MapuHya-KANTA, a class of twelve- 
storeyed buildings, 116, 189, 254, 
257. 

MapiHyaMA, intermediate type of ten- 
tala system, 145, 153. 

MADHYA-RANGA, 
132, 232. 

MAcua, architectural references in his 
poem, 95. 

MaGADHA, 254. 

MAcapHA, class of twelve-storeyed 
buildings, 254, 257. 


MAGADHA-KANTA, a Class of twelve- 
storeyed buildings 116, 189. 


theatres, 130-131, 


Maci Smerois, king of Persia, 390. 

ManABHARATA, battle-scenes in Ang- 
kor Vat, 342. 

— description of towns and palaces 
in, 438. 

— halls referred to in, 414. 

— incidents depicted in 
temples from, 328. 

ManAsopul, temple at Pagan, 321. 

MawAveva, temple at Patan, 286. 

MawA-Gopura, gate-house of the fifth 
court, 118, 233. 

MauwA-KANTA, a Class of five-storeyed 
buildings, 188. 

— of eight-storeyed buildings, 
189. 

MAHA-LAKSHMI, 142-143. 

— image of, 143. 

ManA-MARYADA, fifth court, 116, 118, 
233. 

ManAmBujA, a compound moulding, 
204. 

Maua-nast, 118. 

MAHA-PADMA, I9Q1. 

MAHA-PADMAKA, a Class of round type 
of buildings, 190. 


Siamese 


115, 


MAHnA-PITHA, type of pedestals suited 
to the idols of triad, 139. 
MauarajA (or Apxtraja), 
for, 127-128. 

—class of kings, 124, 125, 126, 264, 
404. 

— lord of seven kingdoms, 264. 

— must belong to solar or lunar race, 
265. 

— throne for, 129. 

Mauasena, king of Ceylon, 291. 


ManA-SupasANa-suTTu, description of 
a flight of stairs in, 72. 


MAHATANTRA, authority on architec- 
ture, in Manasdra, 155, n. 2, 245. 


chariot 


ManavaccA, references to architec 
tural matters in, 72. 

ManAvamsa, chronicle of Ceylon, 290- 
2gI. 

— lst of ten Buddhist missionaries 
sent by Asoka to different parts of 
the world, 324. 

MauaAvira, image in Vaidyanatha 
temple of Kangra, 289. 

ManAvrata, class of phalli, 139. 

MAHENDRA (or NARENDRA) , chariot 
for, 128. 

— class of kings, 124, 125, 126, 264, 
404. 

— lord of three kingdoms, 264, 265. 

— throne for, 129. 

MAuHENpRI, one of the seven mothers, 
142. 

Mandi, 142, 143. 

— image of, 143. 

Mauinpra, son of Agoka, 292. 

Manortsava, car for, 127. 

— throne of deity for great festivals, 
129. 

MayjaPauirt, 
317. 

Mayapauira (or Brivatixra), capital 
of Java, 361. 

Mayaparir, kingdom of Java, Sumatra 
under, 348. 

MajJANALAYA, bath, 124. 


kings, countries under, 


477 


INDEX 


Mayumpar, Dr. R. C., xii, 330, 335. 

— on Indian origin of Cham archi- 
tecture, 337-338. 

Maxara, crocodile, used as decorative 
design, 128, 190. 

MAKARA-BHUSHANA, ear-pendant with 
crocodile pattern, 134. 

MAKARA-KUNDALA, ear pendant, attri- 
bute of Sarasvati, 142. 

— of Mahi, 143. 

MaKARA-TORANA, arch, 130, 131, 146. 

MALA, garland, 135. 

Matay PENINSULA, corresponds with 
MalayadeSa, 316. 

Mataya-DESA, one of the six ancient 
states of the peninsula, east of India, 

316. 

MA.uiKA, buildings, 135 n. 2. 

— oval type of buildings (for Manika 
of Agni-Purdna in Garudd-Purdna), 
Igo. 

MALYA-GRATHANA-VIKALPA, art of mak- 
ing garlands, 8. 

MAtyayja, type of pavilion, 119. 

MAMALLAPURAM, faihas resembling 
Cham structures, 291 337-338. 

Mana, kind of linear measurements, 
144, 197- 

MANnazBopHA, authority on architecture, 
in Mandsdara, 155 n. 2, 245. 

MANA-BHADRAKA, Class of halls, 404. 

MaAnaveva, king of Nepal, patron of 
Manasara, 282. 

— Bodhnath chaitya ascribed to, 287. 

MANAKALPA, authority on architecture 
in Manasd@ra, 155 n. 2, 245. 

MANANGULA, kind of azigula measure- 
ment, 145, 152, 198. 

MAnasaArA, a blank in the architectural 
history of India, filled by, x. 

— a class of Rishis, 213. 

— a compilation of standard work 
on architecture, 185. 

— aking of Malava, 252. 

— a guide book for the architects, 
256. 

—aname with ambiguous 


signi- 
ficance, 210. 


MANASARA, author acquainted with 
conditions of buildings existing in 
the then India, 256-254. 

— authorities on architectures common 
with those of Matsya-Purdna and 
Brihal-samhita, 246. 

— authority on architecture in, 155 
Nn. 2, 245, 246. 

— before Brihat-samhita and close to 
Matsya-Purdna, 282. 

— belonging to the Gupta period, 278. 


— Brihat-samhita, Agamas, Puranas 
indebted to, 208. 
— chapters borrowed from, in 


Samgraha, 182. 

— — identical with Kamikagama’s, 86- 
88. 

— comparative measurements of 
columns, etc., dealt with in greater 
detail in, than in other treatises, 205. 

— compared with Vitruvius, 210, 239. 

— connexion with the treatise of that 

. name, 282. 

— date of, 282. 

—‘ division of compound in, 96. 

— eight classes of villages in, 398. 

— favourable conditions for its being 
written, under Guptas, 277. 

— five mouldings described in, 202. 

— five orders in, 201, 228. 

— — of columns in, 228-229. 

— fuller than Matsya- and Bhavishya- 
Purdnas and Brihat-samhita in three 
important architectural matters, 
249. 

— iricbted to Vedic, early epic and 
early polytechnical works, 208. 

— indifferent treatment of Buddhists 
and Jains by, 268. 

— interpretation of, 238. 

— its relation to Agastya-sakaladhi- 
kara, 171. 

— known to Agni-Purdna, 82. 

— known and used in all provinces 
of ancient India, 210. 

— king of Malava mentioned in Dasa- 
kumdara-charita, 281. 

— largely drawn upon by Maya- 
mata, 161. 

— largest number of mouldings in, 
203. 


478 


INDEX 


MANASARA, measurement, 197. 

— mentioned in Agni-Purdna, 250. 

— names Of the mouldings 
203-204. 

— nine classes of palaces in, 404. 

— nineteen classes of bases in, 204. 

— ninety-eight kinds of buildings des- 
cribed in, 207. 

— not later than Maztsya- and Bha- 
vishya-Purdnas and Brthat-samhita, 
249-250. 

— one-storeyed buildings in, 113, 115. 

— opinions of scholars on, 422- 


449. | 
— recognizes an empire reaching the 


four seas, 264. 

— references to azigula measure, 198. 

— — in Dasgakumaracharita, 251-252. 

— ~— ten-tala measurement, 199. 

— relation of indebtedness with Pura- 
nas, Agamas, and Brihat-samhita, 240. 

— — Matsya-, Bhavishya-, and Agni- 
Puranas and Brihat-samhita, 277. | 

— religious attitude of, 268-273. 

— respect shown to Brahmans and 
predilection for Vaishnavism, 268. 

— Sanat-kum4ra indebted to, 172. 

— similarity to Vitruvius in the propor- 
tion of purely architectural matters, 
names and contents of chapters, 213. 

— sixteen types of pedestals described 
in, 204. 

— standard work on architecture, 
208-209. 

— styles exhaustively treated in, 205. 

— thirty-two authorities on architec- 
ture, 245-246. 

— two Manasaras, 247-248. 

— two sets of names of the orders, 


in, 


201. 

— types of buildings in, 113-1 16, 
186-189. 

— -—-. described in, 186-189. 

— — compared with those of Agni-, 
Garuda-, Matsya-, and Bhavishya- 
Puranas, _Brihat-samhita, Kamik-, 
Suprabhed-dgamas, 195-196. 

— ungrammatical language of, 237. 

— use of gnomon in, cruder than in 
Siiryasiddhanta, 253, 254. 


MANASARA, used in three different 
senses, 252. 

— written under the influence of the 
unifying authority of an empire, 
263-264. 

MANASARPA, name of an architect in 
two epigraphic records, 253. 

MANASIKAVYA-KRIYA, extempore versi- 
fications, 16. 

Manava, class of halls, 404. 

MAnavir, authority on architecture in 
ManasGra, 155, 0. 2, 245- 

MancHa, part of Madhyaranga, 99, 
130. 

MANCHA-BANDHA, a type of base, 109, 
204. 

MANCHA-BHADRA, a Class of pedestal, 
108, 204. 

MawNcHA-KANTA, a class of four-storeyed 
building, 115, 188. 

MANCHALI, 99. 

Maypata, kind of head-dress suited to 
Rati, 132. 

Manpatgga, class of kings, 124, 125, 
264, 404. 

— head-dress of, 132. 

— ruler of a province, 265. 

— throne for, 129. 

ManpanA or RAJA-VALLABHA-MAN- 
DANA or SUTRADHARA-MANDANA, OF 
BuHOPATI-VALLABHA, author of a Silpa- 
$astra, 173- 

Manpapa, different senses of, 119, 234- 

_— divided in four classes in Suprabhed- 
agama, 195- 

— in early examples of Northern style, 
261. 

— pavilion, 99, 105, 111, 114, 117; 
131. 

—— ab in Manasdra, 119-120, 121. 

Manpara, hall in a Dravidian temple, 
258. 

Manpara, square buildings, 190. 

— temples in Suprabhedigama, 195. 

— ten-storeyed buildings, 192-193. 

— twelve-storeyed buildings, rg1. 

Manon1, moulding in Suprabhedagama, 
203, 230. 


479 


INDEX 


Manpuxa, plan of, 102. | 

MaANGALA, throne for Mangala corona- 
tion, 129. 

— coronation, 132. 

MANI-BANDHA-KALAPA, jewelled orna- 
ment for forearm, 134. Be 

MANIBHADRA, class of mandapas in 
Suprabhedagama, 195. | 

MANI-BHUMIKA-KARMAN, art of setting ies 
jewels on the floor, 7. 

Manixa, oval type of buildings, 1g0- 
Ig. 

MANIKYALA, Stipa, similarities with 
Mauri-Tim and Kurghan Tin, 296. 

MANI-RAGA-JNANA (or RAGAKA-RAN- 
JANA), art of colouring precious 
stones, 14. 

ManyjousHA, basket, 1395. | 

— three kinds of materials for, 136. | 

Manyusri, representation of, in mural 
paintings of Valley of Myriad 
Buddha, 313. 

— visited Nepal, 285. 

MANOPAKARANA-VIDHANA, 
measurement, 97—98, 213. 

MANONMANTI, 142, 143. 

— belongs to the retinue of Siva, 143. 

— image of, 143. 

Mawnwu, authority on architecture, 172. 

— a generic name, also of an archi- 
tect, 246. 

— fourteen generations of, 246. 


— heavenly architect originated from 
Brahma, 246. 


— mentioned in ManasGra, 155 n. 2, 


245. 
— source of Varahamihira in archi- 
tectural matters, 243, 245. 


— tracts south of Vindhyas known to 
Aryans in time of, 265. | 
MaAnuswa, class of phalli, 140. 
MANUSHYALAYA-CHANDRIKA, a treatise, 
437- 
MANU-SAMHITA, 


system of 


reference to arigula | 

measure in, 198. | 

MaAnyuKA, one of two merchants who 
built Vaidyanatha temple in Kangra, 
2809. 


MarALa, cage for, 137. 
Mars, temple suited to, 225. 
MARKANDEYA-PURANA, feferred to by 
Bana, 277. 
MarsHALL, Sir JOHN, 379; 418, 445. 
acknowledgment to, ix, xi. 


MaARTANDA, architectural 
Kashmir, 289. 


built by Lalitaditya, 289. 

— courtyard of, 289. 

— temple of, 288-289. 

Mascutine buildings, 114. 

MAsTUNG, excavation at, 47. 

Mastraka, a member of Madhyaranga, 
130. 

Matsya-PurAya, architectural matters 
described in, 81. 

— belongs to the Gupta period, 278. 

— clear details of the five orders in, 
201. 

— compared with Brihat--samhita and 
‘Manasara, 248. 

— eight mouldings mentioned in, 203, 
230. 

— eighteen professors of architecture 
in, 245. 

— five orders of columns in, 228. 

— identical with Bhavishya-Purdna 
and Brihat-samhita in certain matters, 
83, 84, 244, 249. 

— —— measurement in, 199. 

— reference to a/gula measurement 
in, 198. 

— — twenty kinds of buildings in, 
207. 

— relation of indebtedness with Mdana- 
Sara, 240. 

— twenty types of buildings in, rgI- 
192. 

— twenty-seven kinds of halls in, 404. 


lion of 


| — types of buildings compared with 


those of other Puranas, Agamas, 
Brihat-samhit@, and Méanasdra, 195- 
196. 


Mararam, princes of Central Java, 
Prambanam groups built under, 360. 


Marertats for buildings, 113. 


480 


INDEX 


Maruur, K. P., acknowledgment of | Mayaxuix, Buddhist shrines, statue, 
help received from, xxvi. | painting, etc., at 314. 
MATRA, for aggula, 145. | MaAyYALAPuRA; temple of, and capital 
MATRANGULA, kind of angula measure- of Surubodhika type, 386. 
ment, 145, 198. MAYAMATA, a generic name, 161. 


| 
Maupstey, collection of Maya sculp- — a Silpa-Sastra, 159-161, 437. 
tors, 372. | — chapters borrowed from, in Sazi- 
Mautt, kind of head-dress, 131. | graha, 182. ashes 
— suited to Rati, 132. | — eee with Mdnasara, 159- 
Mau.ikA, pavilions of six faces, 120. ae ti f ch ¢ 
— winnow-shaped storeyed mansion, | Tea Ion (OF, clap noe 


120-121. 

Mauri-Tm, similarities with Kabul 
Valley and Taxila stipas, 296. 

— stiipa of, 295-296. 

MAusHALYA, a source of Sammgraha, 184. 

Maya, architect mentioned in Sans- 
krit literature, 374. 

— Asura of Mahabharata, 79, 373-374 


405, 406. : 
— authority on architecture, 172. 


— identical with Mdnasara, 159. 
— included in the list of authorities 
| in Manasara, 161. 
— Tamil version of, 205. 
MEASUREMENT, Gyddi-shadvarga, 152. 
— nine kinds of primary, 144-145. 
— of sages, 147. 
— six kinds of linear, 144. 
— three kinds of arigula measurements, 


— a generic name, 247. Le ' é 
— ahistorical person, 247. — twelve kinds of comparative, 152. 
— built Ratnavati, 247. — units of, 145. 


— carvings represent Indian ob- |} Mrcwa-KAnTa, a class of ten-storeyed 
jects, 375. buildings, 116, 189. 

— chronology, 373-374- Mecuavarya, king of Ceylon, allowed 

— connexion with Java of, 374. ' to build monastery near Bo-tree, 275. 

— descendants of, 372. | — finished Jetavanaram stipa, 291- 

— heavenly architect originated from Mr-Kone, river, Chudhanagari on, 316. 


Brahma, 246. Merurautt, pillar of Gupta period at, 
— imgration of, 372. 382. 


— Indian connexions and origin of, | yexara, a girdle, a belt, 135. 


374-375- Memoriax, mounds like fire-altars in 
— internacine war among, 373- Vedic wee Ee . ale 
. : = - B& . i 

— mentioned in Ma€nasdra, 155 n. 2, iz u, inscription of Aditya- 


245. 
— — Matsya-Purdna, 245. dharma found at, 354- 


— mentioned by Varahamihira, 243, Menpanc Kasunan (or PRAMBANAN), 
| 
| 


245. city in Java, 353- 
— modelled on Java prototypes, 374. MenporeT TJANDI, a small temple in 
— ruins of, in Central America, | Boro Budur group, 358. 

372-375. Me-pinc River, Haripunya-pura on, 
— Silpa-sastras ascribed to, 374: 316, 322. 

— temples and palaces of, 373. Meru, a class of building mentioned 
— Vigvakarma’s treatise based on, in Matsya-Purdna, 191. 


171. | — akind of temple in Suprabhedagama, 
Maya Cans, building activities of, xii. | 195. 
— — chief of, built for Yudhishthira, | — a type of square buildings, 1go. 
xil. — — twelve-storeyed buildings, 192, 
— migration from India of, ix. 193- 


481 


INDEX 


MERUyA-MANDAPA, pavilion used as 
library, 119. 

Meru-KANTA, a class of three-storeyed 
building, 115, 188. 

MERUKOTA, class of buildings in Kamik- 
agama, 194. 

MeESHA-KUKKUTA-LAVAKA-YUDHA-VIDHI, 
art of ram, cock, quail fighting, 14. 

MESHA-YUDDHARTHA-MANDAPA, pavilion 
to witness ram fights, 124. 

Mrerexuta, Hun king, 287. 

MILINDA-PANHA, 239. 

Minpon Min, Burmese king, 319. 

Minerva, temple at Priene, 217. 

— temple suited to, 225. 

Mincun-PAYA, a huge pagoda, 319. 

MirAn, Buddhist shrines at, 307-309. 

— Indian origin of monuments of, 
07. 

bie i ii of the stipa of, 308. 

— ruined fort in, 306-307. 

— two kinds of monuments, 306. 

Mirror, see DARPANA. 

MisHED-I-MurGHAB, ruins of, 400. 

Misicir, mosque, in Sumatra, 350. 

Misra, mixed, a kind of pillars, 111. 

— based on materials, 86, 113. 

— classification of buildings, 187, 194. 

MiSra-DuRGA, mixed fort, 104, 221. 

MigrirA (or MuiSRA-KALPA), class of 
ornaments suited to deities, adhirdja, 
narendra, and other kings, 134. 

— order of columns, 231. 

Misrira, compound, 229. 

Mirra, 17. 

— occupies a great palace, 403, 412. 

Mirra, Raja R. L., x, 251. 

Mirra, S. K., acknowledgement of 
help received from, xxvii. 

MLECHCHHITA-VIKALPA, use of secret 
code language, 15. 

Mopaka, 102. 

MOoHwENyjo-DARO, architecture of, 411. 

— Buddhist monuments at, 29-31. 

— date of the monuments at, 37. 

— discoveries of, 381. 

— extent of, 27-28. 


MoHENjo-pARO, houses in, 31-35. 

lay-out of the city of, 28. 

seven strata of, 28. © 

streets of, 27. 

— temples at, 35, 36-37. 

Monpos, see Mora-pos. 

Mono iru, date of, 373. 

— in Coba, 372. 

MonopTeRAL, classification of temples 
in Vitruvius, 225. 

MorA-DoB (MONDOB), mandapa, a type 
of Siamese buildings, 326. 

— one at Vat Jai, 327. 

MOTHERS, seven, 142, 144. 

— measured in nava-tdla system, 142. 

— images of, 144. 


Mor ey, PRror., 373. 

— discovery of Coba by, xii. 

Moutpincs, five in Manasara, 230. 

— identification of Indian 
Graeco-Roman, 230. 

—: in different treatises, 203, 230. 

— in Manasara, 203-204, 229-230. 

MRICHCHHAKATIKA, references to archi- 
tectural matter in, 95-96. 

— seven courts in, 233. 


with 


MRiGA-NABHI-BIDALA,; musk cat, cage 
for, 137. 

MruiyAra (or MriyAtixA), a moulding, 
204. 

MuHAMMADAN, elements 
architecture, 414-415. 

Mur, 398, 412. 

MukerjeE, S. C., acknowledgment of 
help received from, xxvi. 


in Indian 


MuxuasHaApRA, front tabernacle or 
porch, 112, 113. 

Muxua-Linca, in Po-Nagar, 334. 

Moxwa-manpapa, front pavilion, 358. 

— in Dong Duong temples, 333- 

— in Myson temples, 332. 

MUKTA-PRAPANGA, open theatre, 130- 

— materials used for, 131. 

Muku.i, a class of round type, of 
buildings (for Varddhani of Agnt in 
Garuda-Purana), 191. 


482 


INDEX 


Muxuta, kind of head-dress suited 
to Brahma and Siva, Wardyanas chak- 
ravartin, 132. 

— for the quéen of chakravartin, 132. 

Mata, lower part of phallus, 141. 

— name of a moulding, 204. 

Mdo.a-BERA, principal idol, 145. 

Miuiavarman, king of Kotei, four Sans- 
krit inscriptions of, 352. 

MUuNI-LAKSHANA-VIDHANA, 
sages, 147-148. 

Morpuika, a moulding in Suprabhed- 
agama, 203, 230. 

Morti-KAnTA, class of five-storeyed 
buildings, 115. 

MusHTI-BANDHA, 130. 

— name of a moulding, 202, 204, 230. 


images of 


MusHTIKA, a class of octagonal build- 


ings, IgI. 

MurtI-KAnTA, a class of five-storeyed 
buildings, 188. 

Myson, a number of Cham temples,, 
Bp 0ns 

— deities of, 332. 

— of ten groups, 331. 

— of the third, fourth, fifth, sixth, 
seventh, eighth, ninth and tenth 
groups, 331, 332- 

— plan of first group of, 331. 

— plan and arrangement of second 


group, 33 I. 


9 


N 

Nac, Dr. K. D., 425. 

Naca, serpent deity, worship of, 287. 

NAGA-BANDHA, a pattern of perforated 
screens, 118. 

Nacara, a class of towns, 220. 

Nacara, adjectival form of nagara, 263. 

— a style of architecture, 86, 112, 186, 
194, 195, 206, 207, 257- 

— class of phalli, 140. 

— correspondence with Northern style, 
261-262. 

— of quadrangular shape, 258. 

— originated in Northern India but 
grew prominent in Southern India, 
263. 

— square cars, 127. 

— type of pedestal, 142. 

— various significances of the term, 
262. 


NAGARA-KHANDA, a part of Skanda- 
Purana, 262. 

NAGARA-KRITAGAMA, a Kavi chronicle, 
353- 

— detailed account of Majapahita in, 
361. 

— reference to town-planning in, 361. 

— supplies list of countries under 
Majapahit kings, 317. 

NAGARA-VIDHANA, plans of towns and 
forts, 103-104, 220. 

Nacari, alphabet, 262. 

— a class of towns, 104, 220, 339- 

— territory covered by, 262-263. 

NAcA-VAsuKI, perhaps the original 
deity of Angkor Vat, 342. 

NacAyon, pagoda of the square type 
near Pagan, 320. 

NAcpA, temples at, 260, 261. 

NKeaO a attendant on Jain deities, 
146. 

Naenagjir, an architect, referred to in 
Brihat-samhita, 207. 

— authority on architecture in Matsya- 
Purana and Brihat-samhitad, 243, 245- 
NAGARANANDANA-PURA, place where 

Nagara Brahmins settled, 262. 

Nawana, a sort of tie, 54. 

Nax’on Prat’om, pagoda, original stipa 
of, built in Asoka’s time, 324. 

— images of the time of Siladitya of 
Kanoj found at, 324. 

Nax’on SRiv’AMMARAT, images of Sila- 
ditya of Kanoj’s time discovered at, 
324- 

NAKSHATRA-MALA, necklace of twenty- 
seven pearls, 135. 

NAKsH-I-RUSTEM, 
entombed at, 390. 

Naku ta, cage for, 137. 

NA, stone walls at, 47. 

Nata, authority on architecture in 
ManasGra, 155 0. 2, 245- 

NAta, canal, part of the pitha, 14:. 

— ,water-channel, 114. 

Naranpa, Odantapuri temple monas+ 
tery near at, 283. 

— vihdra caves of, 377. 

NALIKA-GARBHA, rectangular hall, 70. 


Persian. Kings 


483 


INDEX 


NatinakA, kind of temple in Suprabhed- 
agama, 195- 

Nanpana (in Garuda-Purana for Nandika 
in Agni-Purana), a class of halls, 404. 

— — seven-storeyed buildings, 191, 
192, 193- neik 

— — square type of buildings, 190. 

NaNnDAUNGMYA Min, who built Maha- 
bodhi temple of Pagan, 321. 

Nanpaveritra, class of mandapa in Sup- 
rabhedagama, 195. 

Nanpl, image in temple of Java, 359. 

NanpiKA, a type of square buildings, 
190. 

NanpDIN, image at Tanjore, Chamba, 
150, N. 2. ; 

— name of Siva’s bull, 150. 

Nanpiéa (Srva), authority on architec- 
ture in Matsya-Purdna, 245. 

NANDI-VARDDHANA, a class of square 
type of buildings, 190. 
— — seven-storeyed buildings, 191. 
— type of buildings in Bhavishya- 
Purana and Brthat-samhita, 192, 193. 
NANDYAVARTA, a class of six-storeyed 
buildings, 115, 188. 

— — villages, 102, 220, 398. 

— a type of falds, 194. 

— kind of temples 
Suprabheddgama, 195. 

— of mandapas, in Suprabhedagama, 195. 

— perforated screens of geometrical 
pattern, 119. 

Nan PayA, square € pagoda near 
Pagan, built by OLE 320. 

NAnyADEVA, of Tirhut, conquered 
Nepal, 285. 

NaApuMsAKA, neuter type of buildings, 
187, 194. 

NARADA, architecture came to Mana- 
sara through, 246. 

— attendant on Jain deities, 146. 

— authority on architecture mentioned 
in Matsya-Purdna, 245. 

— development of architecture through, 
213. 

— image used as decorative design, 
130. 

— one of the sources of Samgraha, 183. 


mentioned in 


NARADA-PURANA, architectural matter 
in, 83. 

NARASIMHAGUPTA BALApiIrya, a Gupta 
king, 279. 

— religious leanings of, 275-276. 

NARAYANA, Raja-rajesvara temple of, 
in Yajiiasala, xiv. 

— one of the sources of Samgraha, 184. 


— name of Vishnu for temples in the 
North, in villages and towns, 272. 


NARENDRA, head-dress of, 132. 


— ornaments suited to, 134. See 
MAHENDRA. 


Naretuu, built Dhammayangyi, 321, 
n. 2. 


NARAVANE, acknowledgment of help 
received from, xxvi. 


Nassau, remains of an old fort at, 351. 
NAsi, a moulding, 204. 

NAsIx, temple at, 261. 

NATAKA, a moulding, 204. 


— figures of dancers used as decorative 


« designs, 128. 

— images, 134. 

NATAKAKHYAYIKA DARSANA, 
vivants, 12. 

Natesan, G. A., on Ménasara archi- 
tecture, 438. 

NAtTyA-SASTRA OF BHARATA, description 
of play-house in, 96. 

NAvVASAHASANKA-CHARITA, relating to 
Maya as architect of Ratnavati, 247. 

NAVA-TALA, nine-storeyed building, 
115. 

— system of measurement, 
147. 

Naya, authority on architecture in 
Manasara, 155 n. 2, 245. 

NAYANONMILANA-LAKSHANA-VIDHANA, 
chiselling of eyes, 157-158. 

Nayyar, of Malabar, 285. 

NERA Buddhist monuments in, 286- 
287. 

— Hindu temples in, 286. 

— history of, 285. 

— numerous shrines of, 284. 

— religious conditions in, 2, 284-285. 

— temples of, withstood earthquake 
shock, xiii, 431. 


tableaux 


142, 146, 


484. 


INDEX 


NEPATHYA-PRAYOGA, art of scenic re- 
presentation, 8. 

Newar, enttred Nepal, of Tibetan 
origin, snake-worshippers, 285. 

NABHASVAD-BHADRAKA, Class of cars, 
127. 

eae NADAUNG, a pagoda, 318. 

Nieuiva, Agokan pillar at, 382. 

Nicama, a class of forts, 104, 221, 399. 

Nipa, nest, 135, 150. 

NILAKANTHA, cage for, 137. 

NiLAPARVATA. See NISHADHA. 

NimitTa-JNANA, art of reading omens, 
15. 

Nina drip, a moulding, 204. 

— part of the pitha, 141. 

— thickness or diameter, 144. 

Nip, palm-leaf thatch, 351. 

NirABHASA, unsuggestive, a variety of 
Akshara-mushtikd-kathana art, 14. 

Niruxta (of YAsKA), architectural, 
words in, 96. 

NisHapaja, type of pavilion, 119. 

NIsHADHA (also NiLAPARVATA, or MA- 
HENDRA), kind of temples in Supra- 
bhedagama, 195. 

NissanKA MAtta, probably built Dalada 
Maligawa, 293. 

Nityotsava, car for, 127. 

— throne of deity, for ordinary festi- 

vities, 129. 

NiryArcuana, throne of deity for daily 
worship, 129. 

NIVATA-BHADRAKA, Class of cars, 127. 

Nitya, remains of several dwelling houses 
at, 304. 

— stipa of, showing all the essential 
features of stiipa, 296. 

— wood carvings of, 304. 

— wooden stiipa models of, 308. 


NorrTHERN (or Inpo-AryAn) style of 
architecture, 77, 260-261. 


— characteristics of, 261. 
— correspondence with Nagara style, 
261-262. 

— territory covered by, 260. 
NrisimHA, name of Vishnu for temples 
in a certain quarter, 272. 
NRITTA-MANDAPA, dance pavilion, 195. 


Nritya, dancing, 6. 

Ntpura, anklet, 135. 

— worn by Nandin, 151. 

Nympus oF Founratn, temples suited 
to, 225. 


0 


Ocuus, set up statue of Anahita, 395. 

ODANTAPURI, monastery temple at, 
283. 

Ocerr. See TALon. 

Orvers, five, as given in Ménasdara 
and other treatises, 201-205. 

— Indian and Graeco-Roman, com- 
pared, 201, 229. 

— of Graeco-Roman columns, 201, 228. 

— of Indian columns, 228-229. 

— variation of names in different 
treatises explained, 202, 239. 

OrpinamTi0, fitness, 219. 

ORIENTATION of buildings, in Manasara, 
219. 

OrnAMENT of two kinds, four classes of, 


134. 
— list of, 134-135. 
ORTHOGRAPHY, 219. 
Orro, T. A., criticism of Svastika Man- 
sion by, Xxii—xxiil. 
— acknowledgment of help received 
from, xxvi. 
Ovoto (or Ecummo), a Graeco-Roman 
moulding, 203, 230. 
le 
PAcHANALAYA, kitchen, 124. 
PApA, posts of a swing, 136. 
PADA-BANDBA, type of throne, suited to 
astragrahin, 129. 
— type of bases, 204. 
PADA-JALA-BHUSHANA, 
feet, 135. 
PapavinyAsA, the site-plan, 101, 121, 


ornament for 


124. 

Bape a class of three-storeyed build- 
ings, 192. 

— — round type of buildings, 190, 
IQI, 192, 193. 

— a moulding, 203, 230, 231. 

— identified with cyma, 230. 

— lotus. See Anya. 

— of the fitha, 141. 

— pavilion for collecting flowers, 119. 


485 


INDEX 


PApMA-BANDHA, throne suited to praha- 
raka king, 129. 

— a type of bases, 109, 204. 

PApMA-BHADRA, type of thrones, suited 
to maharaja, 129. 

PapMaKA, a Class of village, 102, 220, 

8. 

ge Filion used for temple kitchen, 
11g. 

Paivesiikeved building, 192. 

PADMA-KAMPA, a compound moulding, 
204. 

PADMA-KANTA, a type of columns, I10, 
201, 202, 228, 229. 

— ee of six-storeyed buildings, 115, 
188. 

PADMA-KESARA, a type of bases, 109, 
204. 

— type of throne suited to a chak- 
ravartin, 129. 

PapMA-PITHA, type of pedestals suited 
to the idols of triad, 139. 

PADMA SAMBHAVA, a famous Buddhist 
teacher who went to ‘Tibet from 
Bihar and established the Sam-yas 
monastery, 283. 

PADMASANA, type of throne suited to 
Siva or Vishnu, 129. 

— type of sitting posture, 154, n. I. 

PADUKA, a moulding, 204. 

PaGAN, destroyed by Kublai Khan, 
317- 

— dissimilarity of temples of, from 
Indian originals, 321. : 

— earliest circular pagoda at, 318. 

— foundation of, 317. 

— Mahabodhi temple at, 321. 

— 800 to 1,000 temples at Ananda, 
Kyanktangi, Abhayaitana, etc., 320. 

Pacopa (PayvA), peculiarities of, 318. 

— signification of, 317. 

— two kinds of structures of, 317. 

Paixu (or ParBanG), entrance gateways 
to temples and tombs, 366. 

— Indian origin of, 366-367. 

PAINTINGS, mural, in Valley of Myriad 
Buddhas, 313. 

— in Caves of Thousand Buddhas, 3r1. 

— in Miran stipa, 308, 309. 


PAKHTARDINI, Stipa carvings of, 308. 

Paxace, of nine classes, consists of a 
number of Salas, 124. © 

— royal, in Khotan, 298-299. 

PaxapA, bundles, 54. 

PaLEMBANG, later name of Srivijaya, 
348. 

PALIKA, perforated screen, 118. 

PALIKA-STAMBHA, type of Indian column, 
IIO, 201, 202, 228, 229. 

PALITANA, Jain temple at, 321. 

PaLLaNnKA, bedstead, 73. 

PANAKA-RASA-RAGASAVA-YOJANA, 
paration of beverages, 10. 

PANCHAJANYA, name of Vishnu’s conch- 
shell, 138. 

PANCHALA, a little territory near Hasti- 
napura, 254. 

— class of twelve-storeyed buildings, 
116, 189, 254, 257, 

PANCHA-TALA, five-storeyed buildings, 
II5. 

tags ie, hall of, 404, 4.05- 

Panoirt, A. D., acknowledgment of help 
received from, xxvi. 

PANDRETHAN, temples of, in Kashmir, 
289. 

PANINI, references to 
matters from, 96. 

PANJARA, Cage, 99, 135. 

ace of seven-storeyed buildings, 115, 
188. 

— sizes of, for various animals, 137. 

PANKA-DURGA, clay fort, 104, 221. 

Panna LALL, acknowledgment of help 
received from, xxvi. 


PAPANATHA, temples of, a curious com- 
bination of styles, 259. 

PaRABALA, Rashtrakuta king, pillar of, 
382. 

PaRAKRAMA BAuu I, king of Ceylon, 


pre- 


architectural 


290. 

— built at Pulastipura and Kalinga- 
pura, 292. 

PARMENTIER, M. H., fivefold technical 
classification of Cham monuments 
by, 330-331. 

— on Indian origin of Cham architec- 
ture, 337, 338. 


4.86 


INDEX 


PARAMANU, unit of measurement, 98. 

ParAMA-SADHIKA, plan of, 121, 124. 

ParamaSAyiKA, plan of, 101, 102. 

PARARATON, a Kavi chronicle, 353. 

— gives list of countries under Maja- 
pahit kings, 317. 

PaRASARIYAKA, authority on architec- 
ture in Manasdara, 155 n. 2, 245. 

PaRARTHA, Class of phalli, 140. 

PARAVATA, cage for, 137. 

PARICHAYYACHIT, type of altars, 393. 


ParimAna, kind of linear measurement, 
144, 197. 

PARIMANDALA, round and dome-shaped, 
an unorthodox structure in Vedic 


age, 57. 
Parimir, cross-beams, 54, 56. 
PARISHVANJALYA, a sort of tie, 54. 
PaRITAH, circumference, 144. 


PARIVARA-VIDHANA, attendant deities, 
Te i 

PARIVARA-VIMANA, shrines of attendant 
deities, 116. 

PARIYATRA, type of pavilion, 119. 

ParjJANyYA, a quarter for temples of Ifa, 
272. 

PARNA-MANJUSHA, a box or trunk, 136. 

PARsHNIKA, class of kings, 105, 125, 126, 
264, 404. 

— head-dress for, 132. 

— ruler of one kingdom, 265. 

— throne for, 129. 

Parvata, kind of temples in Suprabhed- 
agama, 195. 

PArvati, goddess attendant on Siva, 
139. 

PARYANKA, a magnified dsandi, 59, 60, 
61. 

— acouch, 99, 128, 218. 

— originated with nobility, 60. 

PASA, noose, attribute of Rudrani, 144. 

PASARGADAE, palace of Cyrus at, 387, 
388, 4.00. 

PAsupaTA, class of phalli, 139. 

Pasgupatr; Siva, 285. 

— shrine of, 286. 


| PAran, Asoka built chaityas at, 285. 


— old capital of Nepal, 284, 285. 
— temples of Mahadeva and Krishna 
at, 286. 
Patuart, pillar of King Porabala at, 
382. 
Patuom, temple at, 325. 
— chedi of, 326. 
Patni-sADANA, women’s apartments or 
bedrooms, 56. 
PATRA-KALPA, Class of ornaments, suited 
only to the deities, 134. 
Parra-PpaTTA, foliated patta type of 
head-dress, suited to patta-dhara, 132. 
PaTRA-TORANA, foliated arch, 130. 
Parta, kind of head-dress, of three 
kinds, 132. 
Parra (or PATTIKA), a fillet, a mould- 
ing, 204. 
PATTA-BANDHA, a type of bases, 109, 
204. 
PartTasuay, class of kings, 125, 264, 
404. 
— head-dress for, 132. 
— rules half a province, 265. 
— throne for, 129. 
PATTADHARA, Class of kings, 125, 126, 
264, 404. 
— head-dress for, 132. 
— lord of half a kingdom, 265. 
— throne for, 129. 
PatTrana, a class of towns, 104, 106, 
220, 399- 
— port, I2I. 
PartiKa, part of the pifha, 141. 
PATTIKA (PETIKA)-VETRA-VANA-VIKALPA, 
art of making bows, sticks, canes, 
CLCs,, L2s 
PautastyA, one of the sources of Sam- 
graha, 183. 
PausuTika, a kind of two-storeyed 
buildings, 115, 187. 
— a proportion in architectural mea- 
surement, 105, 108, 200. 
PAVANA-BHADRAKA, Class of cars, 127. 
Pawan (TYANDI), kitchen shrine, a 
small shrine in Boro Budur group, 
358. 
PayA. See PAGODA, 317. 


487 


INDEX 


Paver, temple of, in Kashmir, 289. 

Prpesrats, in Manasara, 204. 

— in Vitruvius, 227-228. 

— of idols, 139. 

Pzcu, included in Ramanya-defa, 316. 

Pexin, Buddhist monasteries of, 365. 

PemionconcHI, temple resembling 
Hindu architecture in certain features, 
284. 

PERIPTERAL, Classification of temples in 
Vitruvius, 225. 

PrriPTeros, class of temples in Vitruvius, 
225. 

PERROT, 387, 394, 395» 401- 


PERSEPOLIS, 378, 394, 395, 399, 400; 
495, 413. 
— hall of hundred columns at, 379. 


— cemetery of, 390. 

PERSIANS, altars, 392, 394, 413. 

— civil architecture, 399-407. 

— columns, 387-390. 

— funerary architecture, 390-391, 413. 
— halls and palaces at Persepolis, 400— 


03. 
see tay architecture, 397. 
— origin of Indo-Aryan architecture, 
376-380. 
— pillars in India, 378-389. 
— resemblance with Indo-Aryans of, 


376. 
— sculpture, 395. 


— temples, absence of, 391-392, 393- 
395- 
— theories untenable, 334, 436-407. 


PHALAKA, swing-board, 136. 

— type of capital, 386. 

PHALAKA, name of a moulding, 202, 
203, 204, 230. 

PHALAKAM, leaning board, 74. 

PHALAKASANA, type of seats, gg. 

PHALLUS, 139-141. 

— classifications of, 139-140. 

— materials for, 141. 

— measurements of, 140. 

— six kinds of, 155, n. 2. 

— various parts of, 140-141. 

Pumat, temple of, built by the twelfth 
king of Cambodia, 339. 


PHIMEANAKAS, completed by YaSovar- 


man, 339. 
— palaces at, 346. ‘ 


— pyramid temples of, 339, 340. 

PxHNoM BAsEtT, temples of, attributed to 
Siryavarman, 339. 

Pxnom Cuisor, corridor probably occu- 
pied by women, 346. 

— staircase of, 340. 

— temple of, 339. 

Puo Hat, a group of Cham temples at, 
330. 
— copied from 
India, 334. 
Penix, pavilion of seven phoenixes in 
Khotan royal palaces, 298, 299. 

Prone Nwa, caves of, 335. 

PuRA, Stipa at, 325, 327. 

— temple at, 325. 

Pura-cHeD! (also CHEp1), at Sukho- 

, daya, 327. 

— description of, 326. 

— one of the two designs of phra, 
325+ 

PHRA-PRANG (also PRaANG), design of, 
327-328. 

— difference from Indian and Burmese 
structures, 325-326. 

— one of the two types of designs of 
the phra, 325. 

— probable prototypes of, 327. 

Puu Duos, cave temple of, 335. 

Priiar, in the Chalukyan style, 260. 

PitLar (coLuMN) of Mdnasdra, 109-110, 

— wooden, of Tang Fort, Endere 
site, 305. 

PrprAHWA, stupa of, 381. 

Prrakat-Taik, sacred library at Pagan, 
321. 

— plan of, 322. 

PrraLkHorA, vihdra, Persepolitan capital 
repeated in, 379, 382. 

Pirsa, classes of, 14.1, 142. 

— moulded plinth, 261. 

— parts of, 141. 

— pedestal, 130. 

— the stand of the phallus, 140, 141, 
142. 


storeyed stipas of 


488 


—— 


INDEX 


PiTHA-LAKSHANA-VIDHANA, Characteris- 
tics of altar, 141-142. 

PiruiKA, cushioned chair, 74. 

— plan of Ayodhya, 78—79. 

Piatrorm, at Persepolis, general plan 
of, 400-401. 

Puiny mentions Vitruvius, 210. 

Prums Lings, details of, 153-154. 

Po Dam, group of six temples of, 334. 

Po Kaun Garatr, temple of, an 
example of derived art, 331. 

Po Kione Garat, temple of, 334. 

PoLoNNARUWA, a capital of Ceylon, 
290. 

— ruins of, 292. 

— seven-storeyed frdsdda at, original 
of Pagan temples, 321. 

Potvar, palace of Cyrus in, 388. 

PoLycLeTus, a sculptor, 218. 

— on Persian palaces, 399-400. 

Po Nagar, a group of Cham temples 
at, 330, 331. 

— chaitya at, 334. 

— main temple of the group of, 
333-334 

— peculiarity of the roof of another 
temple of, 334. 

— plan of the group of, 333. 

— situation of, 333. 

PorcEeLAin Tower, at Nankin, 366. 

— form and special feature of, 366. 

Po Rome, temple, example of derived 
art, 331, 334- 

PosrureEs, of images, three kinds of, 
84, 154. n. I. 

Porata, ‘Red Palace’, residence of 
Dalai Lama, 283-284. 

— date of, 284. 

Porn, book of palm leaf, in Miran, 
307- 

PorrkA, a moulding in Suprabhedagama, 
203, 230. 

PRABHANJANA-BHADRAKA, Class of cars, 
127. 

PRABHAVA, a Class of rectangular type 
of buildings, 190. 

PrasHuraKA (or ApBHuTA), class of 
two-storeyed buildings, 115. 


PRABODHAKA, authority on architecture 
in Manasara, 155 n. 2, 245. 

PRACHCHHADANA, roofing, III, 120. 

PRAHARAKA, class of kings, 125, 126, 
264, 404. 

— ous be of any of the four castes, 
265. 

— head-dress of, 132. 

— lord of several divisions, 265. 

— throne of, 129. 

PRAHELIKA, solution of riddles, 11. 

Prau Kuan, temple of, attributed to 
Siiryavarman, 339, 346. 

Praw ViHEAR, temple of, attributed to 
Siryavarman, 339. 

PRAJAPATYA-HASTA, a measurement, 98. 

PrajNANAM, memorial pillars or stone 
slabs, a type of funerary structures in 
Vedas, 56, 58. 

PRAKARA, classification according to 
materials, 116. 

— corridors, in Dravidian temples, 
259. 

— court, II4. 

— five kinds of, 116. 

— fourth court, 96, 116, 233. 

PrakAsapityA, Gupta prince, 279. 

PRALAMBA-PHALAKA, an instrument to 
ascertain the plumb lines for sculp- 
tural measurements, 153, 154- 

— use of, 154. 

PRALAMBA-LAKSHANA-VIDHANA, plumb 
lines, 153-155- 

Pratinaka, kind of temple in Supra- 
bheda@gama, 195- 

— type of columns, 201, 202, 228, 
229. 

Pramana, kind of measurement, 144, 
1Q7- 

penne see MENDANG KAMULAN. 

PramBavaNn, Hindu temple at, 358, 
359, 360. ; 

PrANAwa, a sort of tie, 54. 

PranAa, drain, of the pitha, 140. 

PRANG, 327- 

Prapa, canal, 139. 

— water-shed, 79, 99, 119. 


489 


- i. |... . °° °x«, ee ee eee 


INDEX 


Prapra (or PRATHAMA), coronation, 
132. 

— e JANMAN), a2 moulding of the 
pitha, 141. 

PrAsADA, king’s palace, 55, 59, 80, 99, 
119, 414. 

— storeyed building, 67, 70. 

— temple, 152. 

PRASADA-MANDANA-VASTU-SASTRA, trea- 
tise on architecture, 173, 174. 

— contents of, 174. 

PrasTARA, entablature, 111, 120, 150, 
227. 

_ a abe of villages, 102, 220, 308. 

— a moulding, 204. 

PRASHTAR (or PRASTRI), authority on 
architecture, in Mdnasdra, 155 n. 2, 
245. 

PRATHAMASANA, throne for the first 
coronation, 129. 

PRATHAMESHTAKA, first brick, 108. 

Prati (or PratiKA), a moulding, 204. 

PRATI-BANDHA, a moulding, 204. 

PRATI-BHADRA, one of the three classes 
of pedestals, 108, 204. 

PRATIKRAMA, a type of bases, 109, 204. 

PRATIMA, a moulding, 204. 

PRATIMA-VIDHANA, images, I5I—152. 

PRATIMALA, sculpturing, or versifica- 
tion, II. 

PRATIMIT, prop, 54, 56. 

PRATI-VAJANA, a moulding, 204. 

PRATI-VAKRA, a moulding, 204. 

Praucacnit, type of altars, 393. 

PravAst, on Mdnasdra architecture, 
446. 

PREATHONG, son of king of Indra- 
prastha, 338. 


Pre Rup, belongs to the first group, 


340. 
— temple of, 339. 
PRISHADA-BHADRAKA, Class of cars, 127. 


PRITHIVI-DHARA, a class of oval type of 
buildings 190. 

PrIvA-DARSANA, type of columns, 201, 
202, 229. 

PRONAOS, 234. 


Proportions, five, in architectural 
details found only in Manasdra, 200. 
n 


PROPORTION OF COLUMNS, Indian and 
Graeco-Roman compared, 230, 231. 

PROSERPINE, temple suited to, 225. 

PROSHTHA, easy chair, 59, 60. 


Prosty1os, class of temples in Vitruvius, 
225. 


PsUEDODIPTEROS, class of temples in 
Vitruvius, 225. 
Protemy, list of Sanskrit names in 


Indo-China of, 330. 
— reference to Java 


of, 353. 
PULASTIPURA, ruins of, 292. 


PumiLinca, masculine building (also 
called samchita), 187, 194. 

PuNDARIKA, a class of seven-storeyed 
buildings, 115, 188. 

PurA, class of towns, 104, 220, 399. 


in geography 


Puracupta, Gupta emperor, 279. 

Puranas, indebted to Manasara, 208. 

— written in Gupta age, 277. 

PURANDARA, authority on architecture 
in Matsya-Purdna, 245. 

PurRA-suTRA, cord worn round the chest, 
135. 

Purr, distinct style of architecture at, 
262. 

Porima, armlet for upper arm, 134. 

PuRNAVARMAN, dug the Gomati canal, 
361. 

— father of, dug.the Chandrabhaga 
canal, 361. 


Puronira, residence of, 124. 


PuROHITA-PUROGAH, leading priest, his 
part in coronation ceremony, 133. 


PurRusHA, masculine building, 114. 

PURVA-HASTA, a cubit of 24 arigulas, 114. 

PusHKALA, class of two-storeyed build- 
ings, 115, 188. 

PusHkara, class of buildings in Kamik- 
agama, 195. 

PUsHPA-BANDHA, perforated screen of 
flower design, 119. 

— a type of capitals, 387. 


490 


IND 


PusHPA-BHADRA, Class of halls, 404. 


PusHPADANTA, name of a square in 
palaces, 124. 

PusHPakA, Class of halls, 404. 

— rectangular type of buildings, 190. 

PusHPA-MALYA, flower wreath suited 
to prahdraka and astragraha, 312. 

PusHPA-MANDAPA, flower pavilion, 124. 

PusHPA-PATTA, floral turban suited to 
pattabhaj, 132. 

PUsHPA-PUSHKALA, a type of bases, 109, 
204. 

PusHpa-SAKATIKA-NIRMITA-JNANA, art of 
making flower carriages, 15. 

PusHPASTARANA, making beds of flower, 
7. 

PusHPA-TORANA, floral arch, 130. 

PusHYAMITRA, first reaction against 
Buddhism under, 276. 

PustakA, book, attribute of Sarasvatt, 
142. 

— of seven sages, 147. 

PyonostTyLos, a type of temple in 
Vitruvius, 225. 

Pyramip, temples, second architectural 
group of Cambodian temples, 340. 
Pytuius, architect of the temple of 

Minerva at Priene, 217, 218. 


Q 


QuInARIAN MEasuRE, stated to have 
been first introduced by Vitruvius, 
210. 

QuauiFicaTions of architect, 213-218. 

— of kings, 125. 


R 


RAFFLES, Sir S., 354. 

Rais, round the stipa, 68. 

RAJADHANI-NAGARA, a class of towns 
in Manasara, 104, 220, 399. 

RAJA-GRIHA-VIDHANA, on royal palaces, 
a chapter in Manasdsa, 124. 

RAJANGA-LAKSHANA, Characteristics of 
kings, 125. 

RAjA-TARANGINI, references to architec- 
tural matters from, 93, 94, 289, 4.16. 


EX 


| RAJA-VALLABHA-MANDANA, references 
to angula measure, 198. See also 
MANDANA, 

RAJENDRALAL MitTRA, 412. See also 
Mitra. 

RAJENDRAVARMAN, king of Cambodia, 
who built two temples, 339. 

Rajju, a measurement, 98. 

RAmA, images of, in Siam, 328. 

— name of Vishnu, for temples in a 
certain quarter, 272. 

RAMANYA-DESA, one of the six ancient 
divisions of the peninsula east of 
India, 316. 

RAmAvati, City, first Indian king 
settled in, 329. 

RAMAYANA, battle-scenes in Angkor 
Vat, 342. 

— chaityas referred to in, 391. 

— cities described in, 414. 

— description of towns and palaces in, 
438. 

— incidents depicted in Siamese tem- 
ples, 328, 329. 

— mention of Champa in, 329. 

— — Suvarnadvipa in, 348. 

— reference to afgula measure in, 198. 

— — Java in, 353. 

— — Siam in, 322. 

— representations in Javanese temples, 
358. 

Ramocue, Temple, erected to instal 
images of Sakyamuni and Ananda, 
283. 

Ppa (or Ramri), modern name of 
Ramavati, 329. 

Rampart, according to Vitruvius, 223. 

Ramepurwa, Asokan pillar at, 382. 

RAm R&z, author of Essay on the Archi- 
tecture of the Hindus, 108, 109, 113, 
210; 231, 434, 436. 

RaNpDHRA, a style with reference to 
chariot construction, 206. 

RANGA, class of buildings, gg. 

RancamukHa, class of buildings in 
Kamikadgama, 195. 

Rancoon, Shwe Dagon at, 318. 

RAnpurR, Jain temple at, 321. 


491 


i) 


INDEX 


Rao, D. H. R., acknowledgment of 
help received from, xxvi. 

Rao, T. A. Gorinatu, details of tala 
measures given by, 156, 199. 

RASHTRAKUTAS, 274. 

— favoured Jainism, 274. 

— Puranic gods rose to great import- 
ance under, 274. 

Ratua, type of buildings, 99. 

— models of Buddhist vihdras, 259. 

— of Dharmaraja, Arjuna, GaneSa, 
Sahadeva, Draupadi at Mamalla- 
puram, 337-338. 

RATHA-CHAKRACHIT, type of altars, 393. 

RATHADHULI, a measurement, 98. 

RATHA-DURGA, chariot fort, 104, 221. 

RATHA-LAKSHNA-VIDHANA, charateris- 
tics of chariots and cars, 127. 

Rati (Manonmani), head-dress of, 132. 

RATNA-BANDHA, a type of bases, 109, 
204. 

RATNA-KALPA, Class of ornaments suited 
to deities and to adhiraja and narendra 
kings, 134. 

RATNA-KAMPA, a compound moulding, 
204. 

Ree a class of six-storeyed 
buildings, 115, 188. 

RATNANGULIYAKA, jewelled ring, 134. 

RATNA-PATTA, a compound moulding, 
204. 

—_ jewelled patia type of head-dress 
suited to mandalesa, 132. 

eA SEMBHAY A, a cardinal Buddha, 
286. 

RATNA-TORANA, jewelled arch, 130. 

RATNA-VAPRA, a compound moulding, 
204. 

Raurava, a class of nine-storeyed build- 
ings, 116, 189. 

Rawak, date of, jor. 

— description of, 299, 301. 

— of Indian style, 300. 

— originality in, 300. 

— relief sculptures in 300, ol. 

— stiipa and vihdra of, 299. 

— stipa of, shows all the essential stipa 
features, 296. 

RAWLINSON, 397. 


Rep-cap, order of Lamas, 283. 

RexkHA, linear ornaments, 136. 

REKHAJNA, draftsman, 98. ° 

Rus, DuTRENIL DE, find of birch bark 
leaves at Khotan by, 294. 

Ric-VepA, references to pillars in, 385. 

— — walled cities, villages, etc., 398. 
See also VEpIc ARCHITECTURE. 

RIKsHANAYAKA, a Class of oval type of 
buildings, 198. 

Roaps, in Cambodia, 346, 347. 

RODANA-GRIHA, reception room, in 
Svastika Mansion, xvii. 

ROMAKA-SIDDHANTA, 239. 

Roormne, five kinds in Buddhist build- 
ings, 71. 

Roru, 416. 

Rucuaxa (for charuka in Kamikagama), 
a type of square buildings, 1go. 


— an order of columns, 201. 


— in Garuda-Purdna, 190. 

— type of columns, 228, 229. 

RupRA-JAYA, a quarter for temples of 
Iga, 272. 

RupRA-KANTA, a Class of four-storeyed 
buildings, 115, 188. 

— in Manasdara, 228. 

— order of columns, 110, 201. 

RupDRANI, image of, 144. 

— one of the seven mothers, 144. 

Rumminpe!, Agokan pillar at, 382. 


Ss 


Sa, Siamese for Saras, tank, 327. 

SasuHA, hall, 80, 99, 120. 

SABHA-PARVAN, book of Mahabharata, 
references to halls in, 404. 

SABHASA, suggestive, variety of akshara- 
mushtika-kathana art, 14. 

SapA-SrvA, class of four-storeyed build- 
ings, 115, 188. 

SADHAKASARA-SAMHITA, authority on 
architecture, in MdndsGra, 155, n. 2, 
246. 

SarLENDRA; dynasty of the kingdom of 
Srivijaya, 348. 

_— oa who built in Java, 348-349, 
360. 


492 


INDEX 


Sarva, class of phalli, 139. 

— temples in Nepal, 286. 

SAIVA-TANTRA, source of Visvanath- 
chakravartin, etc., a branch of litera- 
ture, 2. 

SaJJANALAYA, temple at, 325, 326. 

Saxra, authority on architecture, 172. 

Saxti, female energy, 138, 143, 144. 

SAKTI-LAKSHANA, female deities, 142- 
144. 

SAxyAmuNI, Buddha, 285. 

— sandal-wood image of, 283. 


SALA, class of buildings, 99, 104, 118. 

divided in to five classes, 194. 

hall, 124. 

in the sense of Prdsada, 194. 

its sense, 234. 

noblemen’s mansion in Vedas, 55. 

storeyed mansion, assigned to 

people of different ranks, castes, etc., 
proper seasons for building, 121.° 

SALAGRIHA, a class of rectangular.type 
of buildings, 1go. 

SALAMANDiRA, buildings, 
GRIHA. 

SALA-vVIDHANA, storeyed mansions, a 
chapter in Mandasara, 120. 

SAu1, corn deposit in foundation of 
buildings, 107. 

SALoKyA, class of devotees, 148, 149. 

Sama, a class of rectangular type of 
buildings, 190. 

SAMABHANGA, a pose of idols, 138, 155. 

SaMAkarwA, class of phalli, 139. 

SAMANTA-BHADRA, representation in 
mural paintings of Valley of Myriad 
Buddhas, 313. 

SAMARANGANA-SUTRADHARA, architec- 
tural work, 181. 

— synopsis of contents, 178-181. 

— treatise of architecture, 178-181. 

SAMBHU-KANTA, a class of eleven- 
storeyed buildings, 116, 189. 

Samora, class of buildings, 86, 114, 
187, 194. See also STHANAKA. 

SampamSa, a sort of tie, 54. 


SampaR§A, attribute of Sarasvati, 142. | 


see SALA- 


SAMGRAHA, 
182-185. 

— an avowed compilation, 182. 

— synopsis of, 182-185. 

SAmipya, class of devotees, 148, 140. 

SAMKALPA, a class of buildings, 105. 

SamxirnA, a kind of pillar, 111. 

— class of buildings in Kamikdgama, 
195. 

— classification of buildings based on 
materials, 86, 113, 187, 194. 

SAMPATHYA, kind of reading, 16. 

Sampurna, class of buildings in Kamik- 
agama, 194. 

SamupcGA (or SamupRA), a class of 
buildings described in Bhavishya- 
Purana and Brihat-samhita, 192, 193. 

SAMUDRAGUPTA, conquest of southern 
kingdoms by, 267. 

— empire of, 267. 

— it comprised the whole of India, 
268. 

— southern campaign of, 266-267. 

SAMUDRAKA, a Class of two-storeyed 
buildings, 192. 

SaMUBYACHIT, type of altars, 393. 

SaMtvIppHA (or VARDHAKA), a Class of 
forts, 104, 221, 399- 

SAm-yas, earliest Tibetan monastery, 
283. 

Samyoyya, class of bhiishana-yojana art, 
siete an authority on archi- 
tecture frequently referred to, 172. 
— mentions Visvakarman as _ his 

authority, 172. 

Sanat-KuMARA-VASTU-SASTRA, 2 trea- 
tise on architecture, 172. 

— authorities based upon, 172. 

— contents of, 172. 

Sancut, traces of six or seven pillars at, 
382. 

— stipa, 291. 

SANDHIKARMA-VIDHANA, wood joinery, 
112. 

SancHamiTTA, daughter of ASoka, 292. 

SANGITA-MAKARANDA, a type of stage 
and auditorium in, 96. 


a work on architecture, 


493 


INDEX 


SANGITA-RATNAKARA of NihSanka- 
§arngadeva, description of audi- 
torium in, 96. 

SANGKALOK, temple at, 325. 

SaNnG-Po, river in Tibet, 283. 

SanxisA, pillar at, and its capital, 382. 

Sanxu, the prototype of Buddhistic and 
Asokan monolithic pillars, 59. 

— stone pillar set up at the corners of 
§masana, 58. 

SANKU-STHAPANA-VIDHANA, the gnomon, 
100. 

Sanxwa, a class of round type of build- 
ings, Igo. 

SANTIKA, a proportion of height, 105, 
108, 200. 

SANKHA, a round type of buildings, 


IgI. 
SAPTA-TALA (TALA), seven-storeyed 
building, 115. 


— measurement, 147. 

SAra, class of buildings in Kamikadgama, 
195. 

SARASVATA, one of the sources of 
Samgraha, 184. 

Sarasvati, female energy attendant on 
Brahma, 138. 

— image of, 142. 

— — usedas decorative design, 123. 

SARIPUTRA, occurring in an inscription 
of Phong Nha, 335. 

SARKARA; gravel, 137, 151. 

SarnatH, Afokan pillar at, 382. 

SaRoRUHA, class of six-storeyed build- 
ings, 115, 188. See Ansa. 

SArvpya, class of devotees, 148, 149. 

SARVABHAUMA, universal monarch, 
chariot of, 127. 

SARVAKALYANA, class of buildings in 
Kamikagama, 195. 

SARVAKAMIKA (or DHANADA), a propor- 
tion of architectural measurement, 
105, 200. 

SARVATOBHADRA, a Class of five-storeyed 
buildings, 191. 

— — of village, 102, 220, 398. 

— — square buildings, r1go. 

-— pavilions of five faces, 120. 


SARVATOBHADRA, perforated screen of 
ear pattern, 118. 

— seven-rowed storeyed mansions, 112, 
120, 121. 

— type of buildings in Bhavishya and 
Brthat-samhita, 193, 194. 

— — Sala, 194. 

SASSANIANS, style of architecture of, 
377: 

SaTaPATHA BRAHMANA, details of fune- 
rary structures in, 56. 

= gone to arigula measurement in, 
198. 

SararpDHIKA, class of halls, 404. 

Sati, chapels in Nepal, 286. 

SAt Mawar PRASADA, a seven-storeyed 
temple in Ceylon, 292—293. 

SATRU-MARDANA, Class of halls, 404. 

SarruNjaya, temple at, 260, 261. 

SATTANGO, sofa, 74. 

SATYA-KANTA, class of eight-storeyed 
buildings, 115, 189. 

SaryavarmA, king of Champa, 334. 

SAUGANDHI, grass, 107. 

SAUKHYAKA, pavilion for the purposes 
of pilgrimage, 120. 

SAUMUKHYA, order of column in Supra- 
bhedagama, 201, 202. 

— type of columns, 229. 

Saumya, class of buildings in Kamik- 
agama, 195. 

BEA RENTA, class of gate-houses, 
118. 

SaunaxkA, authority on architecture in 
Maisya-Purdna, 245. 

SaurA, authority on architecture in 
Manasa@ra, 155 n. 2, 246. 

SAURA-KANTA, a class of nine-storeyed 
buildings, 116, 189. 

SAvirri, female energy attendant on 
Brahma, 138, 142, 143. 

— image of, 143. 

Savana, bedstead, 59, 60, 98. 

— class of buildings, 86, 114, 187. 

SAyYANALAYA, bed chamber, 124. 

SAYANA-RACHANA, art of bed-making, 
7, 

SAYANA-VIDHANA, couches, 128. 


494. 


INDEX 


SAyujya, class of devotees, 148, 149. | SHome, M. G., acknowledgment of 


Scoria (or Trocuitos), a Graeco- | 


Roman moulding, 203, 230. 

SCULPTURE, conventional nature of 
Persian, 395. 

— in India, 396. 

— in Persia, 395. 

— no independent statuary in Persia, 
395- 

— only bas-reliefs, 395. 

SECURE PEACE, HALL of, a hall in the 
Forbidden City, 367. 

SCENOGRAPHY, 219. 

SEHWAN, fort at, 45. 

— remains of ancient fortress at 
Kothras Buthi, 45. 

SEKHARAPIDA-YOJANA, art of putting 
a3 ornaments of flower on the head, 

SENAPATI Par, built three temples with 
pavilions in Po-Nagar, 334. 

SERINDIA, ix, Xi. 

— area included in, 294. 

SEsHA-BHASHYA, one of the sources of 
Samgraha, 184. 

SEVEN-STOREYED BUILDINGS, in Bud- 
dhist literature, 73. : 
SEWwELL, G. A., acknowledgment to, 

xXXV1. 

Szewa (SEwvu), TJANpDI, a thousand tem- 
ples, 359- 

— plan of, 359. 

SHAD-vARGA, applied to falda, 121. 

Sua Mir, usurped regal power in 
Kashmir, 287. 

SHANKARDARA, architectural remains 
at, 315. 

SHARMA, MApDHAvV SARAN, acknow- 
ledgment of assistance received from, 
XXVii. 

SHastri, Panpir R. M., acknowledg- 
ment of help received from, xxvii. 
Suat-TALA, six-storeyed buildings, 115. 

SHINASI, stiipa at, 315. 

Suinto, temple, difference of, 369. 

SHODASAsRA, sixteen-cornered build- 
ings, 192, 193, 194. 

SHocuns, palaces of, 371. 


help received from, xxv. 
SHORCHUK, shrines, temple, stiipa, 314. 
Suwe Dacon, history of, 318-319. 
— pagoda at Rangoon, 318. 
Saws HMlaeey a pagoda at Pegu, 
318. 
Sram, modern, smaller than ancient 
Syamadeéa, 322. See SyAmApESA. 
— part of, included in Syamadeéa, 
and part in Kambhoja-deSa, 316. 
Sra, a class of forts, 104, 220, 399. 
SriopHA, a kind of two-storeyed build- 
ings, 115, 187. 

— figures of, 131, 146. 

SIDDHANATHA, temple of, 290. 

SippHANTA-SrRoMANI, description of 
gnonom in, 94-95. 

— references to angula measure, 198. 

SixHA, top, 118. 

— special feature of Nagara style, 
261, 262. 

SimxwA (or DANTA), axle-band, 127. 

Smuara, cupola, 113. 

— dome, 118. 

— in the Chalukyan style, 260. 

— of Indo-Aryan order, 259. 

— of pyramidal form in Dravidian 
temples, 258. 

— special feature of Niagara style, 
261-262. 

— steeple, 79, 80, IgI. 

Srxim, traces of Hindu architecture in, 
284. 

Sua, stone, III. 

§mAprryA, king of Kanoj, sent mission- 
aries to foreign countries, 324. 

SitpaRATNA, a treatise on architecture, 
176, 437- tae 

— an abridgment of Manasdra, 176. 

— details of tala measures taken 
from, by Rao, 199. 

— synopsis of, 176-177. 
Sirpa-samGRAHA, Manasara quoted in 
true form in, 253. See SAMGRAHA, 
Srtpa-SAsTRA, a compilation from many 

sources, 175. 
— chapters enumerated, 173-174. 
— its important features, 175. 
— of Mandana, 173-175. 


495 


INDEX 


Sinpr-LAKSHANA, qualification of archi- 
tects, 213. 

SnwHA, a class of buildings, 191. 

— — oval buildings (in Garuda-Purana 
for Rikshanayaka of Agni), 191. 

— — halls, 404. 

— image of, 151. 

— lion, divine vahana, 151. 

— type of buildings in Bhavishya and 
Brihat-samhita, 193, 194. 

SmHAsana, throne, 130, 146. 

SmmHAsANA-LAKSHANA-VIDHANA, Charac- 
teristics of thrones, 129. 

Simmariry, of Jain, Hindu, Buddhist 
architecture, 76—77. 

SmnpHuKA, class of building in Kamik- 
agama, 194. 

SmrA$-CHAKRA, 
Vishnu, 138. 

Smastraka, kind of head-dress used 
by Parshnika, 132. 

Smo-visHUsHANA, a head ornament, 
134. 

oes. head-piece of the couch, 

Ws 

SiTA; images of, in Siam, 328. 

Srre, selection of, Manasara and Vitru- 
vius compared, 219-220. 

Siva, a deity, 246. 

— chariot of, 128. 

— class of buildings in Kamikdgama, 
194. 

— Be ative negligence to, 
273. 

— head-dress of, 132. 

— idols, attributes, dress, and attend- 
ant female energies of, 139. 

— image of, in temples of Java, 358, 
359- 

— one of Hindu triad, 137, 138. 

— origin of architecture from, 213, 
246. 

— pavilion for unhusking corn, 120. 

— popularity at Nepal, 285. 

— temples in Tibet, 283. 

— temples and images of, in Siam, 


ornamental nimbus of 


2'70— 


325. 
— throne of, 129. 
Srva-BHAca, the upper part of phallus, 
I4I. 


Stva-KANTA, a main pillar with five 
minor pillars, 110. 

— an order of column, 261. 

— — in Manasara, 228. 

— a pentagonal pillar, 110. 

SIVANA, sewing, II. 

SrvANKA, class of phalli, 139. 

SrerkA, 99. 

SivikA-GARBHA, square hall, 70. 

StvikAvesmA, a class of rectangular 
type of buildings, 190. 

SKANDA, image of, in Myson temples, 

2. 

See ea enk, a hexagonal pillar, 110. 

—a main pillar with six minor 
pillars, 110. 

— class of gate-houses, 118. 

— mentioned in Méanasdra, 228. 

— order of columns, 201. 

SKANDAGUPTA, emperor, 274, 279. 

— religious beliefs of, 275. 

SKANDA-PuRANA, architectural matter, 
referred to in, 81. 

— Bengal manuscripts of, 278. 

— named after Skandagupta, 252. 

SKANDHATARA, a kind of single-storeyed 
buildings, 114, 87. 

SKANDHAVARA, a Class of forts, 104, 
221, 339- 

SmasAna, funerary structures, 56, 58. 

SmirH, Caprain, added pedestal to 
Allahabad pillar of Agoka, 382. 

Smiru, Pror. Exxror, on Indian origin 
of Maya civilization, li, 374, 375. 

SmirH, V. A., x, 274, 277, 278. 

SNAPANA-MANDAPA, bath pavilion, 195. 

SoERABAYA, inscription of, refers to 
drainage operations in Java, 361. 

Somrya, location of So-mo-je, accord- 
ing to Stein, 297. 

Fs oa a temple, bad condition of, 
416. 

So-mo-jE, a convent referred to by 
Hiouen Tsang, 297. 

— identified with king’s new monas- 
tery of Fa Hien, 297. 

— legend of its origin and its Tibetan 
version, 297, 298. 

— located in modern Somiya, 297. 


496 


INDEX 


Sopana, flight of stairs, 72. 

Souru Inp1a; Aryan conquest of, 266— 
267. ° 

— ceganieetion of in the third century 
B.c., 266. 

SpHURJAKA (GuRJAKA), a class of 
twelve-storeyed buildings, 116, 189, 
254, 255 257- 

SPINDER, 373- 

SPoonER, Dr., erroneous theories of, 
406-407. 

— oon Persian origin of Mauryan 
architecture, 379-380, 401, 4.03, 405, 
406, 412. 

Sra, Cambodian, for Saras, tank, 327. 

SRENI-BANDHA, a type of bases, 109, 
204. 

Sri-BANDHA, a class of pitha, 141. 

— a type of bases, 109, 204. 

— — throne, suited to Parshnika and 
Patta-dhara, 129. 

Srinpapra, type of throne, suited to 
adhirdja and narendra, 129. : 

Sri-suoca, class of gopura, 118. 

— aclass of seven-storeyed building, 
115, 188. 

— a type of bases, 109, 204. 

Sri-Banoy, citadel of, 336. 

SripHarA, name of Vishnu, 272. 

SRIDHARA-SVAMIN, gives a detailed 
account of sixty-four arts, 2, 12 n. 5, 
wp ek 

Sriyaya, a class of oval type of build- 
ings, 188, 190. 

— — three-storeyed buildings, 115. 

— — seven-storeyed buildings, 115, 
188. 

SrikANTA, a type of bases, 109, 204, 

— — octagonal type of buildings, 
190. 

Srixara, class of two-storeyed build- 
ings, I15, 187. 

— — gate-houses, 118. 

— kind of single-storeyed buildings, 
114, 187. 


°e 


SRimAD-BHAGAVATA, no practical know- 
ledge of arts in time of, 3. 

— reference to sixty-four arts in, 1. 

Sri MAra, first historical Hindu king 
of Champa, 330. 

— — halls, 404. 

Srimuxua, type of throne suited to 
mandalesa, 129. 

Srinca, copula, rg1. 

Srr Prarap Sineu, Raja, on Manasara 
architecture, 441. 

Srivarta, kind of temples in Supra- 
bhedagama, 195. 

Srivatsa, a class of square type of 
buildings, 1go. 

— halls, 404. 

— symbol on the chest of Vishnu, 
138. 

SrivyAvA, kingdom of, in Sumatra, 
348, 360. 

RIVISALA, a kind of single-storeyed 
buildings, 114, 187. 

— class of gate-houses, 118. 

— — mouldings of fitha, 141. 

— type of throne, suited to narendra 
and parshnika, 129. 

Starrs, in Buddhist buildings, 72. 

SramBHA, pillar, of Buddhists, Jains 
Saivas, of Vaishnavas, 67, 96. 

— shaft of, 227. 

STAMBHA-LAKSHANA-VIDHANA, pillars, 
IOQ-III. 

STANA-SUTRA, cord worn round the 
breast, 135. 

Srey, Sm M. Auret, 416. 

— discoveries and explorations in 
Central Asia by, ix, xi, 294, 297, 
298, 299, 300, 301, 302, 303, 308, 
3II, 312, 314. 

Srem, Pror. Orro, on Manasara archi- 
tecture, 439. 

STHANAKA (or Samcutra), classification 
of buildings, 86, 114, 187. 

— standing posture, 154. 

STHANIYA, a class of forts, 104, 220, 


; z 399- 
— order of column mentioned in| SrHApaka, master of the ceremony, 


Suprabhedaguma, 201, 202. 
— type of columns, 229. 
SrikUMARA, author of treatise on archi- 
tecture, 176, 177. 


155 


— in house-entering ceremony, 122. 
— his part in coronation ceremonies, 


132. 


497 


ee a 


bi 


INDEX 


STHAPATI, 13, 155- 
— chief architect, 214. 
— — origin from divine architect, 
246. : : 
— his part in coronation ceremonies, 
132. 

—_— s house-warming ceremony, 122. 

STHAVARA, stationery, class of idols, 
138. 

Sruuyna, pillar, set up on graves, 58. 

STOLZE, 390. 

STRABO, 399, 400. 

Srrinmwvca, feminine type of buildings, 
187, 194. 

Srucco, see SUDHA. 


Sropa, known as chaityas in Nepal, 391. 


— purpose of, gor. 

— two kinds of, 67-68. 

Sropi (or SrvprxA), pinnacle, its height 
in puucings of different castes, 113, 
118. 

STUPIKA, pinnacle, 112. 

STUPI-KiLA, pin of the s/upz, 112, 113. 

SryLe, architectural, three kinds of, 
thegeographical origin of the names 
of, 257. 

— of buildings, 186. 

— references to, in different branches 
of literature, 206. 

SROG-MUKHAR, life-fort, 298. 

sete ane eau PO, king of Tibet, 
283. 

— font of, 284. 

SRUK-sRUVA, sacrificial ladles, attri- 
butes of Brahma, 138. 

Srurimyaya, class of halls, 404. 

SriveixsnA, a class of octagonal build- 
ings (in Garuda-Purana, for Srikantha 
of Agni), 191. 

RIivyAvRITTA, class of mandapas in Supra- 
bhedagama, 195. 

SuBHANKARI, a composite order of 
column in Suprabhedigama, 201, 202, 
229. 

SuBHApDRA, class of halls, 404. 

SUcHI-VAYA-KARMAN, tailoring and 
weaving, II. 

Stouryo, cross-bars, let into banisters, 


72. 


SuppHA, a kind of pillars, 111. 

— classification of buildings, based on 
materials, 86, 113, 186,.194. 

SupHA, stucco, mortar, and plaster, 
137, 151. 

Sucriva, class of halls, 404. 

Suxa, parrot cage for, 137. 

SuKapeEva, refers to sixty-four arts, 2, 
L750. 4. 

SuKA-SARIKA-PRALAPANA, teaching of 
parrots, etc., to speak, 14. 

SUKHALAYA, class of three-storeyed 
buildings, 115. 

— aie of three-storeyed building, 
188. 

SuKHANGA, pavilion used as a guest- 
house, 120. 

SuKHODAYA, temple at, 325, 326, 327, 
29. 

Suen authority on architecture in 
Matsya-Purdna, 24.5. 

Suxra-Nit1, architectural matter in, 
92. 

— xeals with architecture, 250-251. 

— measurement described in, 93. 


— passages identical with Kdmunda- 
kiya, Nitis, 251. 

SEVEN-TALA, anterior to Matsya-Purdna, 
251. 

Sutva-SuTRA, OF BAUDHAYANA, refer- 
ence to a7igula measure in, 199 

— structural details of brick altars 
in, 392. 

SUMATRA, absence of Hindu monuments 
in, 349- s f 

— area and geographical position of, 
348. 

— derivation of the name of, 348. 

— history of, 348. 

— horned houses of, 349-350. 

SumMMER PALACE, pagoda of, 366. 

— resembles Indian structures in 
design, 366. 

— shape and ornaments of, 366. 

SunpArRA; class of six-storeyed build- 
ings, 115, 188. , 

SUPRABHEDAGAMA, details of the five 
orders in, 201. 

— five classes of columns in, 229. 

— four classes of bases in, 204. 

— list of chapters in, 91. 


498 


INDEX 


SuPRABHEDAGAMA, mentions ten kinds | SuvARNA-DvipA, in Ramayana, probably 


of buildings, 207. | stands for Sumatra, 348. 
— reference to afigula measure in, 198. | SUVARNA-KANCHUKA, golden bodice, 
— — tala measurement in, 199. 135. 
— — three styles in, 207. SUVARNA-RUPYA-RATNA-PARIKSHA, test- 
— relation of indebtedness with Mdana- ing of gold and silver, etc., 13. 
sara, 240. Suvrata, class of halls, 404. 


— scanty details about pedestals in, | Syarca-KANTA, class of eight-storeyed 
205. : tt sh | buildings, 115, 189. 

— similarity with Mdnasdra, go. | SvasTI-BANDHANA, class of one-storeyed 

— summarizes all important matters | buildings, 114, 187 

3 3 £ 


on architecture, go. 4 : 
— two sets of mouldings described in, SvasTIKA, a class of two-storeyed build- 
ings, 115, 187. 


202-203. et 
— types of buildings in, 195. — — octagonal type of buildings, 
— — compared with those of Puranas, II2, 190, IOI. 

Brihat-samhita, Manasara and Kamik- | — — phalli, 140. 


— — villages, 102, 220, 308. 

— plan of building, xviii. 

— type of sald, 194. 

SVASTIKA-KHADGA; a Class of octagonal 
type of buildings, 1go. 


dgama, 195-196. 
SUPRATI-KANTA, a Class of nine-storeyed 
buildings, 116, 189. 
Suru-BopHikA, roll capital, 386. 
Strya, image of, in Myson temples, 


> | SvAsTIKA MANSION, a residential build- 
332. 4 
SuvaryA-sUTRA, gold string. See ing, Xv. ee 
STANASUTRA. — —cost of, xxiii, n. I. 


— description of, xvii—xx. 

—  —modern devices in, xx, xxi. 

— —-pavilions of three faces, 120. 
— —perforated screen of cross-pattern, 


SURYA-SIDDHANTA, description of gno- 
mon in, 94-95. 
— improved methods of using gromon 


in, 253, 254. nen 
—— later than Manasara, 254. — —plan and arrangement of, xvii— 
SURYAVARMAN, eleventh king of Cam- xx. 
bodia, 339. — —plough-shaped storeyed mansion, 
Stryavarman II, completed Angkor ee ? 
Vat, 339. — —situation and site-plan of, xyv— 
Susa, 378 » 400, 413. a 
— fore bean oft Sone 3 SVASTI-KANTA, class of six-storeyed build- 
SuSuisuTA, class of halls, 4.04. INES ae 188. Sys 
SirrapHARA, the joiner, carpenter, SvASTIKASANA, type of sitting posture, 
214. 154, n. I. 
SUTRA-DHARA-MaNDANA, author of | SVAVRIKsHA, a class of round type of 
architectural treatise, 173. buildings, rge. 
Strra-crimn, draughtsman or | SVAYAMBHU, Siva, popularity at, Nepal, 
designer, 13, 214. 285. 
— the designer, origin from divine | SVAYaMBHU (or uDBHUTA), class of 
architects, 246. phalli, 140. 
SUTRA-KRIDA, playi it dand | SVAYAMBHU-NATHA, a Buddhist monu- 
rope, 11. Reps wih eee ment of Nepal, 286-287. 
Suvarya, class of phalli, 140. SveTa-RAkTA, colours of Savitri, 143. 
Suvarya-syimi, identification of, 321 | Swamy, K. S. SmpHarinca, 428, 441. 
Nn. 5. 324. — on Manasdra architecture, 441. 


499 


INDEX 


SwaT, monuments at, 315, see UDYANA. 


Swine, for different castes, 128. See 
Dota. 

SyAma, dark blue, colour of Savitri 
and Mahi, 143. 

SyAma-BHADRA, class of halls, 404. 


SyAma-pkSa, advent of Indians in, 323- 
24. 

ee cinctural remains in, 325-327. 

~— connexion with India of, 328-329. 

— its geographical boundaries, 322. 

— known from, 322, 323. 

— one of the six states of the peninsula 
east of India, 316, 322. 

— peoples settled in, 323. 

— vulgarity of taste in modern struc- 
tures in, 327-328. 

SYANDANA, chariot, a conveyance, 99. 


SysryLos, a type of temples in Vitru- 
vius, 225. 


T 


Tacore, Dr. A. N., 425. 

Tacore, Dr. R. N., on Manasara 
architecture, xiii, 422. 

ap ee receptacle of oil, 
136. 

Tarrririva-Sammra, different shapes 
of altars enumerated jn, 392. 

TAKHTABAND, stiipa of, in Buner, 296. 

TAKHT-I-JAmsuiD, platform of, 400. 

TAKSHAKA, carpenter, origin from 
divine architects, 13, 246. 

TAKSHANA, carpentry, 13. 

TALA, measurement, 89, 144 197, 
199, 232. 

—a moulding in Suprabhedagama, 
203, 230. 

TALAMANA, kind of measurement, 81, 
92, 145, 146, 199, 200. 

TALON (or OcEE), reversed cyma, a 
Graeco-Roman moulding, 203, 230, 
237. 

— identified with ghata, 230. 

TALpPA, nuptial bed, 59. 


TAMIL, version of Mayamata, scanty 
details about bases in, 205. 


TAmrRaA, copper, 137. 


‘TANDULA-KUSUMA-BALI-VIKARA, artistic 
arrangements of rice-meal, flowers, 
and dishes, 6. - 

Tanc Forr of Endere, wooden pillars 
of, 205. 

Tantric, rites in Nepal, its effect 
on architecture, 285-286. 

— goddess at Bhawani temple, 286. 

TAPAS-KANTA, a Class of eight-storeyed 
buildings, 115, 189. 

Ta-Prom, Brahmanical temple built by 
Rajendra-varman, 339. 


_»— belongs to the first group, 340, 346. 


TAraA, breadth, 144. 

TARA, Mahayana divinity, temple of, 
in Java, 349, 360. 

TARANGA-BODHIKA, type of capital, 
386. 

TARKU-KARMAN, art of spinning, 12. 


TasHiwinc, temple of, 284. 

TATANKA (or TADANKA), a kind of ear 
ornament, 134. 

TATIKA, name of a moulding, 202, 
204, 230. 

Tr zE1I0s, probably same as téla, 237. 

TrempLe of Kashmir, a homogenous 
group, 287. 

— absence of in Persia, 393-394. 

— — in India, 394-395. 

— of a quasi-classical style, 288. 

— of Gratitude, porcelain tower of 
Nankin, 366. 

— of Heaven. See Great Dracon. 

— —peculiarities of, 288. 

TENASSERIM, included in Ramanya- 
defa, 316. 

TESTUDINATUM, type of Graeco-Roman 
court, 233. 

TETRASTYLON, type of Graeco-Roman 
court, 233. 

THAKuRI, dynasty of Nepal, 285. 

THAMBHA, posts or banisters, 72. 

Tank Ho, citadel of, 336. 

Tuaton, library of, 321-322. 

THATPYINUYU, temple of, at Pagan, 
321, n. 2. 

THEATRE, materials used for, 131. 

— various members of, 130. 


500 


INDEX 


TueE1N, ordination hall of priests, 321. 

Tuomas, Pror. F. W., 425, 433- 

THRONE, royal and divine, 129. 

TIBET, monasteries in, 283-284. 

— religious conditions of, 283. 

Ti-cHIA-PO-FU-NA {(DiRGH. 1 HAVANA) 
SANGHARAMA, convent, miraculous 
statue of Buddha in 299. 

— identified with Ziaret of Bowa- 
Kambar, 299. 

Ties, of various sorts, used in construct- 
ing straw houses, 54. 

Tita, Sesamum indicum, foundation- 
deposit, 107. 

Times, Literary Supplement on Mana- 
sdra architecture, XXii, 441. 

Timi, fish, 100. 

Tinc, Japanese buildings, belong to, 
369, 370. 

— usual type of architecture in China, 
363, 364. 

TrrAt, Buddha’s footprint at, 315. ° 

TiRTHANKARAS, twenty-four Jain safhts, 
146. 

Tha ea. capital of taranga bodhika 
type, 386. 

Tirtiri, cage for, 137. bd 

Tyanpr (CHanpi), shrine of, 354, 356, 
358. 

Toxar-Dar, ruined stupa at, 315. 

Top-parA, Buddhist siéipa at, 315. 

Topa-tim, shows essential Indian fea- 
tures, 296. 

— stiipa of, 296. 

Topra, Agokan pillar of, 381. 

Torana, arch, 80, 128, 133, 139. 

—— of a balance, 136. 

ToRANA-VIDHANA, on arches, 130. 

Torus, a Graeco-Roman moulding, 203, 
230. 

— Pentified with Hara, 230. 

Tower, different kinds, according to 
Vitruvius, 223. 

— of Silence, 391. 

Town, according to Vitruvius, 222-224. 

— eight classes of, in India, 220, 399. 

— its plan and layout according to 
Manasara, 222. 


501 


TTOWN-PLANNING, in Manasara and 
Vitruvius compared, 220-224. 

TRIBHANGA, three flexion, one of the 
three poses, 138, 155. 

TRI-DHATU-SARANAM, 
dwelling in Veda, 62. 

TRI-KANTA, a main pillar, with three 
minor pillars, rro. 

TRI-MURTI-LAKSHANA-VIDHANA, Charac- 
teristics of the Indian Triad, 137- 
139. 

TRITALA, three-storeyed building, 115. 

TritTREsTA (or TrrrAstri), a Brahman, 
traditions about, 354. 

TRIVISHTAPA, octagonal type of build- 
ings, 190, I9gI. 

Trocuitos, a moulding. See ScoTiA. 

Tsrpr (or Zep), corresponds with 
chaitya of Nepal. 

— principal variations in the design 
of, 318. 

— the bell-shaped stapa of Burma, 
317- 

Tucu, inscription of, refers to Chandra- 
bhaga canal, 361. 

TuLA, a moulding in Suprabhedagama, 
203, 230. 

— balance, 135. 

— identified with fillet, 230. 

— its parts, 136. 

TULA-PURUSHA-DANA, 136, n. I. 

Tuxuum, wall of, 373. 

Tumpuru, image used as decorative 
design, 130. 

Tunca, a moulding, 204. 

‘Tun-HUANG, architectural remains in, 
$09-313- 

TurrAn (YAR-Kuoro), Buddhist shrine 
at, 313. 

TurKESTAN, EASTERN (or CHINESE), 
Buddhism from India in, 294. 

— civilization of its own, 295. 

— period of antiquities of, 303. 

— stipas of, agreed with Kabul Valley 
stipas and conform to Indian type. 
296. y 

he Graeco-Roman order 


columns, 201, 227, 228. 
— type of Graeco-Roman courts, 233. 


three-storeyed 


INDEX 


TvAsHTar, authority on architecture in 
Manasara, 245, n. 2. 

— heavenly architect originated from 
Brahma, 246. 


U 


UBHAYATAH-PRAUGACHIT, type of altars, 
393- 

Ucu-cuuirsuaka, pillow for the head, 
61. 

Upaxka-GHaATA, making of fountains, 8. 

Upaka-vApya, playing jalataranga, 8. 

Uparrvr, temple at, 261. 

UpARA-BANDHA, girdle round the waist, 
135. 

Upsuouta, a phallus. See SvAYAMBHU. 

UppryAna. See UpyAna. 

UpyAna (or UppryAna), modern Swat 
Valley, 315. 

— reference in literature, 315. 

— ruins in, 315. 

UMA, images of, in Po-Nagar main 
temple, 333. 

UMBRELLA, on a Stipa, 305. 

Unuisam, either a headline running 
along the top of banister or figure- 
head at its lower end, 72. 

Unicorn, pillar of Persia, 378. 

Unmana, kind of linear measurement, 
144, 197. 

UPpA-DHARA, support of a chariot, 127. 

UpaxAnta, a class of six-storeyed 
buildings, 115, 188. 

Uraut-Tuein, in Pagan, its plan and 
arrangement, 321. 

Upamana, kind of linear measurement, 
144, 197. 

Uramit, pillar, 54, 56. 

Upana, plinth, a moulding, 204. 

Upapapa, minor pillar, r1o. 

Uparirna, class of mouldings, of pithas, 
I4l. 

— aes of madhyaranga, 1930. 

— pedestal, 108, 227. 

UPARI-PRASADA-TALA, the upper flat 
surface of the house, 72. 

UpasamcuiTa, classification of build- 
ings, 194. 


sy part of couch supporting back, 

Vie 

UPpaTULA, a moulding, 263, 230. 

— identified with fillet, 230. 

URAGA-BANDHA, a type of bases, 109, 
204. 

Urpuva-PpapMA, a moulding of the 
pitha, 141. 

Usui, a class of round type of build 
ings, 190. 

UsunisHa, characteristic of the Bud- 
dhist image, 147. 

Usuyisut for Ushni of Agni (in Garuda- 
Purana), a class of round type of 
buildings, 191. 

Urana, darning, 11. 


Urpata, attribute of Savitri and Mahi, 
143. 

— Kashmir dynasty, built vihdras and 
temples, 287. 

UtsADANA, art of shampooing, 14. 

Urrama, largest type of ten-tdla system, 
345, 147, 152-153. 

Urramsua, a class of rectangular build- 
ings, 190. 

Urrara, fillet, a moulding, 130, 150, 
(203, 204, 230. 

— in Suprabhedigama, 203, 230. 

UTTARADHYAYANA-SUTRA, arts referred 
to in, 1. 

— seventy-two arts studied by Maha- 
vira, 3-4. 

UrrarasenA, king, stipa of, 315. 

Vee upper garment, of Brahma, 
138. 

UrrarosHTHA, moulding, identified 
with cavetto, 203, 230. 


V 


VADYA, instrumental music, 6. 
VAHANA, vehicle its height as unit, 
197, 200. 


— moulding identified with abacus, 
203, 230. 

— riding animal, 145. 

VAHANA-VIDHANA, images of riding 
animals of gods, 149-151. 

— of various gods, 151, no. I. 


502 


INDEX 


VAnINI-MUKHA, a class of forts, 104, 220, 
399- 

VAHUMAN, 407. 

Vanya, litter or canopied sedan chair, 
59-60. 

VAIDYANATHA, description of, 289-290. 

— its history, 289. 

— special features of, 290. 

— temple of, 289-290. 

VAIJAYANTIKA, a kind of single-storeyed 
building, 187. 

VAIKHANASAGAMA, details of tala mea- 
sures taken by Rao, from, 200. 

— references to architectural matters 
from, 9gI. 

VAINAYIKI-JNANA, art of etiquette, 17. 

VarrAjA, a classification of the square 
type of buildings, 1go0. 

VAISHNAVI, image of, 144. 

— one of the seven mothers, 142, 144. 
VAISHNAVISM, predominating religion 
during the Gupta period, 276. . 
— preference to, in Manasara, 270-273. 

VaIsRAVANA, legends about, 2908. 

— oldest shrine in Khotan, 298. 

— perhaps of Indian origin, 2098. 

— seven-storeyed wooden tower j4n, 
208. 

— temple of, 297-298. 

VAJANA, moulding identified with fillet, 
130, 203, 204, 230. 

— moulding of fitha, 141. 

Vajra, class of octagonal buildings, 
190, IgI. 

— — phalli, r4o. 

— features of Buddha, gor. 

— orders of column in Matsya-Purana 
and Brthat-samhita, 201, 202, 228, 
220. 

VAJRA-BANDHA, a type of bases, 104, 
204. 

VaJjRA-KANTA, a Class of eleven-storeyed 
buildings, 116, 189. 

VajJRA-PATTA, a compound moulding, 
204. 

Viana type of sitting posture, 
Y545 Oe ee 

VaJRA-SVASTIKA, a Class of octagonal 
type of buildings, rgo. 


VaKRA, a class of octagonal buildings, 
gl. 

VALABHA (or VALABHI), a moulding, 
204. 

Vatanui, correct spelling of Balabhi 
given in Garuda-Purana, 190. 

VaLaya (for Balaya of Agni, in Garuda- 
Purdfia), a class of round type of 
buildings, rgr. 

— bracelet, 134, 135. 

VALABHI-CHCHHANDAKA, a Class of five- 
storeyed buildings, rgr. 

VALLABHACHARYA, gives detailed 
account of sixty-four arts, 2, 8, g, 10, 
Il, 14, 15,17 n. 6, 16 n. 1, 12 n. 4, 


VALLEY oF Myrtap Buppuas, 311. 

— arrangement of, 312, 313. 

— frescoes in, 312. 

— influenced by Ajanta and Ellora, 
313- 

— mural paintings in, 313. 

— principal caves of, 312. 

VALLI-BANDHA, creeper pattern of per- 
forated screens, 118. 

VAma, class of phalli, 139. 

VAmaNnA, name of Vishnu, for temples 
in the South, 272. 

VamsA, flagstaff, 152. 

— ribs of bamboo canes, 54, 56. 

Vaméaka, class of twelve-storeyed build- 
ings, 254, 257. 

— land of Vatsas, 255. 

VamSA-KANTA, a Class of twelve-storeyed 
buildings, r16, 189. 

VANA-DURGA, forest-fort, 104, 221. 

VANA-MALA, garland of wild flowers, 
ornament of Vishnu, 135, 138. 

VAPI-KUPA-TATAKA, 106. 

Vapra (or VAPRAKA), a moulding, 
204. 

Vion a type of bases, 10g, 
204. 

Sunes see BRIHAT-SAMHITA. 

VARAHI, image of, 144. 

— one of the seven mothers, 142, 144. 

Varapa, gift-bestowing attitude of 
hand, 138, 143. 


593 


| 


INDEX 


Varata, a class of twelve-storeyed | VAT, enclosure, 325. 


buildings, 189. 

VarpHaka (or SAMvIDDHA), class of 
forts, 104, 399. See SAMVIDDHA. 

VARDHAKI, painter, origin from divine 
architect of, 13, 214, 246. 

VarpHAMAnA, Class of phalli, 139. 

— ten-rowed storeyed mansion, 121. 

— type of sald, 194. 

VARDDHANI, a class of round type of 
buildings, 190. 

VaraA-MuDRA, boon-bestowing attitude 
of hand, gor. 

VarTULA, a class of buildings, 192. 

VaruNA, name of a square in a palace, 
124. 

_ Bae a a great palace, 403, 412. 

VASISHTHA, authority on architecture 
in Matsya-Purana and Brihat-samhita, 
243, 245. 

— desires a three-storeyed dwelling, 
in Veda, 403, 412. 

— one of the seven sages, image of 
147. 

VASTRA-GOPANA, Changing appearance 
of fabrics, 16. 

VasTRA-MANJUSHA, linen-chest, 136. 

Vastu, habitation, divided into four 
classes in Manasara, 218. 

—reliquary of bones, a type of 
funerary structure in Vedic age, 56. 

VAsTuBODHA, authority on architec- 
ture in Manasdra, 155, 0. 2, 245. 

VAstu-kiRrTI, class of halls, 404. 

VASTU-NIKSHEPA-MANDAPA, store-house, 
124. 

VASTU-PRAKARANA, the classification of 
Vastu, 99, 100, 218. 

VASTU-PURUSHA, spirit of the house, in 
Svastika Mansion, xvii n. 1, ror. 
VAstTu-SAsTRA, a treatise on architec- 

ture, 173. 
PASTA R, architecture, a treatise, 
198. 

— denification of the term, 13. 
VAsTUVIDYAPATI, authority on archi- 
tecture in Manasdra, 155 n. 2, 245. 
VAsuDEVA, authority on architecture in 

Matsya-Purana, 245. 
— name of Vishnu, 272. 


VAT Ex, temple of, 339. 

VAT Jat, at Sukhodaya, 325, 326, 327. 

VAr Manpapa Sr NA, at Sajjanalaya, 
a chuttamukk, 326. 

VAT Pxuu, supposed palaces at, 346. 

— temple of, 339. 

VAT a Jum, manddapa at Sukhodaya, 
326. 

VAT SisAvar, three towers at, 327. 

VATSYAYANA, See KAMASTURA. 

VaTTAGAMINI ABHAYA, built a vihdra 
and Abhayagiri dagab, 291. 

VAULT, systematically employed in 
Burma, 320. 

VAyu-PurANA, belongs to Gupta 
period, 278. 

— references to architectural matters 
from, 83. 

— referred to by Bana, 277. 

VEDA, pavilion used as an assembly 
hall, 120. 

— "references to halls, palaces, etc., in, 
403, 412. 

Veni (or VEDIKA), construction of, 63— 


= eo of Madhyaranga, 130. 

— platform, 127, 128. 

— shapes of, 63, n. 2. 

VEDI-BHADRA, one of the three classes 
of pedestals, 108, 204. 

VeEDIKA, pedestal of a lamp-post, 135. 

VEDI-KANTA, a class of four-storeyed 
buildings, 115, 188. 

VENDIDAD-SADA, perhaps refers to 
images of Anahit, 395. 

Venus, temple suited to, 225. 

VESARA, circular ear, 127. 

— class of phalli, 140. 

— — pitha, 142. 

— identical with the style found at 
ee Bhuvanes’vara, and Kanarak, 
262. 

— of round shape, 258. 

— of two types, 257. 

— style of architecture, 86, 112, 186, 
194, 195, 206, 207, 257, 263. 

VESMAN, residential houses, 105. 


504 


INDEX 


VESSANTARA-JATAKA, representation in 
Miran wall paintings of, 309. 

VICHITRA-SAKA-PUPA-BHAKSHYA-VIKA-~ 
RA-KRIYA, art of cooking, g—10. 

VipyApuarA, figures of, 131, 146, 148. 

— used as decorative design, 130. 

VIDYASANGRAHA-NIBANDHA, a compila- 
tion, used by Sikadeva, 2. 


ViENG SA, inscription of, 361. 

VIHAN, six in Vat Jai, 327. 

— Vihara, 326. 

VinérRA, Buddhist monastery, 66, 67, 
68-69, 93. 


ViyyAvA, a kind of two-storeyed build- 
ings, 115, 187. 

— class of halls, 404. 

— — octagonal buildings, 190, 191. 

— coronation, 132. 

— in Kdmikdgama, 195. 

— pavilion for marriage ceremonies, 
119. 

+ oe for vijaya coronation, 129: 

VIJAYA-DHVAJA-TIRTHA, refers to sixty- 
four arts, I. 

VIJAYA-SAMBHAVA, Buddhism believed 
to have been introduced under, 298. 

ViJAYAVIRYA, king who built Hgum- 
stir vihdra, 208. 

VIJAYIKI-JNANA art of warfare, 17. 


ViKALPA, class of buildings, 105, 106, 
113, 114, 187, 194, 225. 

— — of doors, 234. 

—— — phalli, 140. 

— — prakara, 116. 

— shape of pavilions, 120. 

VIKRAMASILA, monastery of, 283. 

VitLacEs, Buddhist India, 65. 

— classes of, 220, 398. 

— in India, in Buddha’s time, 398. 

— plan and other details of, 221- 
222, 398. 

Vimana, class of buildings, 190, 192. 

— pavilion, 79, 80, 104. 

— shrine, 259. 

— wrongly read for vifala in Garuda- 
Purana, 1909. 

VIMANA-CHCHHANDA, a class of eight- 
storeyed buildings, 191, 193. 


VIMANA-VIDHANA, the general descrip- 
tion of buildings, 112. 

VinA, attribute of Sarasvati, 142 n. 1. 

— of Kinnaras, 148. 

VinA-DAMARUKA-VADYA, playing on 
lute and small Sarre 

VINAYA TEXTS, hot-air bath described 
in, 73. 

VinDHYAJA, type of pavilion, 119. 

VIPULAKRITI; a class of six-storeyed 
buildings, 115, 188. 

VIPULANKA, a class of six-storeyed 
buildings, 115, 188. 

Virasy1, previous Buddha, 
Nepal, 285. 

Vira, coronation, 132. 

— throne for vira coronation, 129. 

VirACHANA, making of bed-sheets, etc., 
11. 

Vira-KANTHA, a moulding in Supra- 
bhedagama, 203, 230. 

— type of columns, 110. 

VirA-RAGHAVACHARYA, refers to sixty- 
four arts, I. 

VirAsana, class of mandapas in Supra- 
bheda@gama, 195. 

— type of sitting posture, 154, n. I. 

VirATA, class of twelve-storeyed build- 
ings, 116, 254, 257- 

— country near about Jaipur, 255. 

ViSALA, authority on architecture, in 
Manasara, 155 0. 2, 245- 

— class of buildings, 190, 195. 

— — halls, 404. 

— — mandapas, 195. 

ViSALAKsHA, authority on architecture 
in Matsya-Purdna, 245, 246. 

VigAL-BHARAT, on Manaséra archi- 
tecture, 447- 

VisHANA, horn, Ig!. 

VisESHAKA-CHCHHEDYA, tattooing, 6. 

ViSESHARCHANA, throne of deity for 
special worships, 129. 

VISESHIKA, 135, 0. 2- 

Visunu, chariot of, 128. 

— family deities of, 271. 

— foundation of temples of, 272. 

| — head-dress of, 132. 


visited 


995 


iy 


INDEX 


Visunu, idol of, 138. 

— images and temples in Siam, 325, 
328. 

— — in Java, 358. 

— one of the Hindu triad, 117, 137, 
138. 

“= oes for temples of, 272-273. 

— temples of, 324. 

— ten incarnations of, 271. 

— throne of, 129. 

— ultimate source of Silpa-Sastra and 
architecture, 213, 270, 246. 

VisHNu-BHAGA, the middle part of 
phallus, 141. 

VISHNU-DHARMOTTARA, two types of 
theatres mentioned in, 96. 

VisHNU-KANTA, Class of four-storeyed 
buildings, 115, 188. 

— — gate-houses, 118. 

— main pillar with eight minor ones, 
110. 

— order of columns, 201, 228. 

VisHNU-PURANA, arts, living and prac- 
tical, in time of, 3. 

— arts referred to in, I. 

— belongs to the Gupta period, 278. 
— explains learning of sixty-four arts 
in sixty-four days by Krishna, 3. 

— sixty-four arts referred to, 2. 

— used and quoted by Jivagosvamin, 2. 

VisHNuVANT, the ridge of the top on 
the roofing, 56. 

VisTARA, breadth, 144. 


ViSvABODHA, authority on architecture, 
in Manasdra, 155 n. 2, 245. 

ViSvA-KANTA, a Class of five-storeyed 
building, 115, 188. 

— of nine-storeyed buildings, 116, 189. 


ViSvVA-KARMAN, authority on architec- 
ture, 172. 

— chapters borrowed from, in 
Samgraha, 188. 

— heavenly architect originated from 
Brahma, 246. 

— in Byihat-samhita 243, 245. 

— in Matsya-Purdna, 245. 

— mentioned in Manasara, 155 n. 2, 
245- 

— pone) name for an architect, 
246. 

— Yantra-matrika attributed to, 15. 


| ViSvVAKARMA-PRAKASA (or VISVAKARMA- 

VAstu-SAsTRA), another title of 
Visvakarma-Silpa, 166. 

— chiefly astrological, 167. 

— its chapters enumerated, 166, 167. 

— together with Visvakarma-Silpa, 
formed one book, 169. 

ViSVAKARMA-SILPA, attributed to Visva- 
karman, various other titles of, 166. 

— a compilation, 168. 

— chiefly sculptural, 169. 

— its synopsis, 168-169. 

— together with  Visvakarma-Silpa, 
formed one book, 169. 

ViSVAKASYAPA, authority on architec- 
ture in Mdnasdra, 155 n. 2, 245. 

VISVAMITRA, one of the seven sages, 
image of, 147. 

ViSVANATH, temple of, at Benares, 4.16. 


ViSVASARA, authority on architecture 
in ManasGra, 155 n. 2, 245. 

— one of the sources of Samgraha, 
184. 

ViSvesA, authority on architecture in 
Manasara, 155 n. 2, 245. 

VISVANATHA-CHAKRAVARTIN, refers to 
sixty-four arts, I. 

VirastI, a measurement, 98. 


Virruvius, a Roman architect, 210. 

— referred to by Pliny and Frontinus, 
210. 

— compared with Manasara in columns, 
227-232. 

— — in courts, 233-234. 

— — in doors, 234-235. 

— — in forms and species and founda- 
tions of buildings, 224-227. 

— — in linguistic style, 237-238. 

— — in sculptural measures, 237. 

— date of, 240. 

— flourished 25 years before 
Christian era, 210. 

— his treatise, compared -with Mdna- 
Sara, 210-239. x 

— several editions of hjs treatise, 
210, 211 n. I, 2LI-212." 

— similarity to Mdanasara in purely 
architectural contents, etc., in names 
of chapters, 213. 

— treatise divided in ten books, 211. 

— uncertainty of its age, 238. 


506 


at 


=3> 


INDEX 


VIVRITA, a class of nine-storeyed build- 
ings, 116, 189. 

Vo-cHANH, Sanskrit inscription of, 329. 

VocEL, Dr. J. Ph., on Manasara archi- 
tecture, 433, 434. 

VRIHASPTAI, authority on architecture 
in Matsya-Purdna, 245, 246. 

Vrint, corn, deposit in foundation, 
107. 

VRIKSHAYURVEDA-YOGA, art of garden- 
ing, 14. 

VRIsHA, a Class of buildings, 191, 193, 
194. 

VRISHABHA-LAKSHANA-VIDHANA, a Class 
of oval type of buildings, 190. 

— image of, 150-151. ; 

— materials of, 151. 

— vahana of Siva, 150. 

VrisHa (Nanp1) Maypapa, bull pavi- 
lion, 195. 

Vrira, authority on architecture, in 
ManasGra, 155 n. 2, 245. O 
Vritta, type of buildings, in Bgzhat- 

samhita, 193, 194. 

— —columns, 201, 202, 228, 229. 
Vrirra-KumBHA, a moulding of the 
pitha, 141. : 

VYAGHRA, tiger, cage for, 137. 

VyajANA, fan, 153- 

VYAJANA-DANDA, fan-post, materials 
for, 135- 

VyYAut, leogryph, 130. 

Vyas, BrajA Moxan, acknowledgment 
of help received from, xxvii. 

VyAsA, authority on architecture, 172. 


VyAvAMIkI-JNANA, art of physical exer- 


cises, 17- 
Ww 


Wakxuan, three Kafir forts at, 305. 


WALCOTT, 357- 

WALL, of ramparts of stamped loess in 

je cote anes in Khotan, 298. 

Wan-ro-Hs1a, resembles the type of 
Chien-fo-tung, 3%2- 

— size of grottoes, 312. 

— temple grottoes of, 312. 


Warts-DA-GE, a circular building, 293. 

WaAZIRISTAN, antiquity of, 47. 

— —— Pishin, 48 

— remains at different localities, 48. 

Wetr, Lirut.-Cot. R. §., acknowledg- 
ment of help received from, xxv. 

WHEEL, tyre of, 127. 

— its different parts, 127. 

— of various numbers in different cars 
127. 

— bee suited for, 127. 

Wurtz, G. W. M., acknowledgment 
of help received from, xxvi. 

Wittrams, Sir Monter, 416. 


Winpows, in Buddhist buildings, 71. 

— Manasara, 118, 235. 

— special features of Chalukyan style, 
pierced, ornamented, 260. 

— width of, 119. 

Woop, Gren. W. A. R., 323, 324. 


xX 


XERXEs, entombed at Naksh-i-Rustem, 
390. 

— hypostyle hall of, 389, 401-402. 

— palace of, 388-4or. 


Y 


YaJAMANA, height of image determined 
by comparing with the height of, 140, 
145: 

YAJNA-BHADRA, Class of halls, 404. 

YAJNA-KANTA, a Class of five-storeyed 
buildings, 115, 188. 


YajNASALA, temples built on Manasara 
method in, xiv. 


YajNa-sUTRA, sacred thread, attribute 
of the seven sages, 147. 

YaxksHA, attendant on Jain deities, 
146. 

— flanking the entrance of Jetavana 
vihara temple, 297. 

— heads of, in Rawak, got. 


— images of, 148. 

— used as decorative designs, 128-190. 
Yaxsuini, heads of, gor. 

Yama, authority on architecture, 172. 
— name of a square in palaces, 124. 


507 


INDEX 


YAMA-KANTA, @ ee of eleven-storeyed 
ildi 116, 189. 

Ee aliireted ARES 115; 
188. 

Yana, conveyance, 98, 218. 

Yan Pron, temple of, 331. 

VAWi.a-cRIHA, bathroom, 70. 

YANTRA-MATRIKA, art of making mono- 
gramy, etc., 15. 

Yar-yaoTo (Turan), Buddhist shrines 
at, 313. 

YasopHARA, commentator of Kdma- 
siitrd, ‘7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17. 

YAsKA, see NIRKUTA. 

YaSovarman, king of Cambodia, 339. 

Yava, barley grain, a unit of measure- 
ment, 98, 145, 152. 

YAVADViPA, Java, 353. 

YAVANA-DESA, one of the six states into 
which peninsula east of India was 
divided, 316. 

Yin, who refers to important buildings, 
in old Khotan capital, 208. 

YocAsana, type of sitting posture, 154, 
n. I. 

Yont, lower part of phallus, 141. 

Yonrpvara, the pranala of the pitha, 
I4I. 


YUCATAN, geographical 


372. 
— home of Maya clans, 379, 


YUDHISHTHIRA, palace built b 
for, 374, 406. Y Maya 
YUKA, a measurement, 98. 


POSition of, 


YUNGLO, tomb of, 367. 

Yu-TIEN, city of, 208. 

— temple of Vaisravana in, 208, 
YuvarRajA, residence of, 119, 124, 


Z 


Zaiwl, S. A., acknowledgment to 
XXvi. , 

Zamr-1-ATIsH-PARAST, one of the three 
Kafir forts at Wakhan, 305. 

ZANZIBAR, one of the three Kafir forts 
at Wakhan, 305. 

ZEDI, see ‘TSEDI. 

ZIARAT, Of Bowa-Kambar, identified 
ewith Ti-chia-po-fu-na of Hiouen 
Tsang, 299. 

ZIGGARATS seven-storeyed building, | 
of Ghaldea, 73. 

ZicuRAT, Babylonian temple, resemb- 
hing storeyed vihdras, 377-378. 

ZIMMER, his views on Vedic buildings, 

“untenable, 54-55. 


508 


AS 


2k s'xsolbs 


! 


a 


Lotte OF FICE 


herrt 25lbs 
incor 


SSE ae z : ; * 


aati ESC emer, — 


SWASTIKA MANSION 
ie le NI 


Ground floor 


v/ 


scale 1=8 


eee | 


wr eae ay 
é oe 
i LUuro j 
Kivchen” | kK 726" 
ING = ' Store | 
| USES § soe baee ms 
——— 


x= i 
S | 
x80 
aN 
Sy ae 
1 7 
ny ‘ 
= O 
z= 
& 
‘ oP 
G 14-9 — 
SS j 


rd 


SWASTIKA MANSION 
PLAN 


i=? floor 


iol 
Secle-G@=? 


—_ 


BALCONY 


t 

Wr, Se, oh 

{ 2x5 x30 lbs, i 
wv Gon. 


[S SEGREGATION ee 


Se 


\< ROOM 


GED ROOM 


Paps. 
UY roxde x25. 
. wn 


BALCONY mi 
ae 2 a Cc 


9 


SAW. GANESAN 
KARAIKUDI, S. |. RR 


OPEN TERRACE 


SWASTIKA MANSIOI 
ELEVATION 


SCALE I= 4° 


eed = aan 


RL EAU OI OUR] UE) 
EE 0 es ae ee SNS Se Sanne Seed es 
(ahold 


Spee 
okay Ate. 


Sg SS Fe ee ee i Sea 
PUD OCDTOUUOOUDOOODOOUUUT OOo OUD Oooo DUT Ona Soo ODO coo ooo oo ooo 


co Gal 
ee 


DOR OREX 
SOT 
We: SOONG 


BES Se MAGA hoOSdaa 
pees CG REGGE SOG 
Ly 
2 Ay 


aie fm arpa a 
Ea 


= TI 
= 


WLS LAL = ALL 


Pan 

Epa 

sees 
o> 


SSS 


tat ha 
Bi { 


Pesce | aca! 
Ay ig 


vt 


TIKA MANSION 
LEVATION 


SCALE 12 4’ 


SAW: GANESAN 
KARAIKUDI. SI. R. 


y \ 
Ny 
L N 
IG SVAN =RIVA TAD ae ae 
vi Wit alt WIA | | i i nw 
5 SSS Ss ss a 


An AFA | OR 
i a ca GR Welt Ray fl a 


SWASTIKA MANSION 
PLAN 
254 floor 


Scale — a=! 


SAW. GANESAN 
KARAIKUDI. S. I. R. 


OPEN TERRACE 
SV Aah) 


OPEN TERRACE 


