
DRAVTOIAN ARCHTmCTCRE 

G. JOUVEAU-DtBREHL 

Edted irtfli fttfct ud Kotes 
& KRBHNASWAMI AIYMGAK 




DRAYMAN ARCHTTECTDRt 



ASIAN EDUCATIONAL SERVICES 
NEW DELH1 1987 




ASIAN EDUCATIONAL SERVICES 

C-2/15, SDA, P.B. No. 4534 
Nqw Delhi- 1 1001 6 


AES Reprint: 1987 

Published by ).)etley 

For ASIAN EDUCATIONAL SERVICES 

C-2/15 SDA, New Delhi-110016 

Printed at Konark Press, Lakshmi Nagar 

Delhi-110092 



EDITOR’S PREFACE 

The institution of a chair of Indian History and Archaeology 
at the University of Madras gives evidence of the rising interest 
in these subjects not only at the University but also among 
the cultured public.. That this interest should be so directed as 
to make it fruitful, few will deny. It is with a view to .stimulate 
interest in one of the subjects comprised in the term 
Archteology, and direct that interest into fruitful fields of work 
that this little handbook has been rendered into English and 
published in the present form. I made the acquaintance of 
the talented author of the Trench work the Archceology and 
Iconography of South India (published by Paul-Genthner of 
Paris in the Anmles Musk Guimet), through a review of the 
work in the Journal of the Boyal Asia, tic Society by Mr. H. 
Sewell. In the course of a growing acquaintance his sugges- 
tion that a handbook, such as the one here offered to the public 
would be useful, struck me as a very good one, and I readily 
took upon myself the responsibility of bringing out this English 
version of his French work, which is rather of the nature of an 
'introduction to the subject of his larger work than an abridge- 
ment of it. He has since brought out in English, Part I of his 
Pallava Antiquities which gives ample evidence of what sys- 
tematic work in subjects like this can achieve. This introduc- 
tion is intended to enable such systematic work being under- 
taken with success by those to whom a regular course of 
training is impossible. 

The French text of the author was done into English for 
me by my friend Mr. K Amrita Kau, M.A., Header in Bravidian 
Philology, University of Madras, to whom it gives me the 
greatest pleasure to acknowledge my obligations. The trans- 
lation had the benefit of Professor G-. Jouveau-Dubreuil’s 
own revision, and has his. approval in the form in which it 
appears. 

In case this shm# find welcome among those interested 
in these unremunerative, though far from unpleasing, studies, 



11 


I shall be happy to go further forward and provide introductory 
manuals in other allied subjects, such as Epigraphy, Numis- 
matics, etc., with the assistance of specialists in these various 
branches. I take this occasion to acknowledge my deep debt 
of obligation to Professor Jouveau-Dubreuil for his disinterest- 
ed labours for this little book, and place the book before the 
learned public in the hope that both he and his editor, will 
have the great satisfaction of an appreciative reception 
which is the highest reward which labourers in such fields 
have at all a right to expect. It is hoped that University 
students will take kindly to this subject, so that when they 
pass out of the University into the various walks of life, they 
■may find in this, the opening for an enjoyable hobby, each 
according to his or her opportunities. 

* Sbivasam ', S. KBISHNASWAMI AIYANGAR. 
Mtlapobe, Madras, S, 

October 22, 1916. 



CHAPTER I 

GENERAL OBSERVATION 

We propose to study here the architecture of that part of 
Southern India which extends along the Coromandel Coast 
from Lake Pulicat to Cape Comorin. This architecture 
is distinguished .very clearly from that of the neighbouring 
countries, and as it concerns entirely and exclusively the 
country occupied by the Tamils, that is the people who speak 
Tamil, we shall give it the name ‘ Dravidian Architecture ’ 
since the two words ‘ Tamil ’ and ‘ Dravidian ’ are in reality 
one and the same word, having absolutely the same etymology. 
We shall study, however, more especially a very limited part of 
the Tamil country which includes the three districts- of 
Chingleput, North Arcot and South Arcot. It is possible to 
make a precise study only by closely limiting the field of that 
study. 

Religious edifices are extremely numerous in the South of 
India. They are found everywhere, in big towns, in villages, 
in the forest ; almost all these monuments are covered with 
inscriptions, and before writing the history of their architec- 
ture, it is necessary to translate these inscriptions and to study 
the form of the character, because one can often thus discover 
the age, if not of the monument itself, at least of the inscription. 

The patient efforts of historians and epigraphists have, 
succeeded in establishing some facts from amongst a mass 
of uncertainties and contradictions. 

Special works: South Indian Inscriptions, Epigrmhia 
Indica, Indian' Antiquary, t Government Orders on Annual 
Reports on Epigraphy (Southern Cjrcle), these contain innu- 
merable documents upon the subject. 

These historical works have served, on the one hand, to 
make the numbering of a great part of the more important 
monuments possible'; on the other hand, to determine the age 
of some of them. 

The art itself Jias been very much neglected. And yet if 
any of the monuments have been abundantly described and 



2 


photographed, they are the pagodas of Southern India. The 
temples of Tanjore, Trichinopoly, Madura, form part of a 
classical tour, and tourists who go to India never fail to visit 
them before going to see Benares and the Taj. There exists 
besides a great number of accounts of travels in which the 
pagodas are described, and illustrated often by very beautiful 
pictures. 

The descriptions and the photographs are, it is true, very 
precious materials for the study of that art ; they are docu- 
ments indispensable to archeologists who have not been in 
the country and who cannot study the objects themselves ; but 
that does not constitute a study ; there is a difference between 
describing and studying. Most of the authors who have treat- 
ed Dravidian art do not seem to have sufficiently made that 
distinction. A book on architecture should not resemble a 
tourist’s guide. It is necessary not only to make one see things, 
but to make one comprehend them, to evolve general ideas and 
to discover principles. It is, therefore, necessary to compare the 
monuments everywhere, to give them a systematic classification 
and to set forth the laws according to which they have been 
constructed, It is a matter of great importance to describe the 
anatomy and the palaeontology of the edifices. 

We now propose not to recommence, as it has been done a 
thousand times, the particular description of some edifices con- 
sidered individually. We shall try to make the science of 
monuments, by an attempt to discover general laws by the 
comparative study of the motifs of ornamentation. 

Works of art, indeed,' are not made entirely at random 
from inspiration; there are almost always discoverable some 
methods, principles and invariable canonical rules. Whatever 
may be the originality of a work of art, it is rarely an isolated 
work ; it is connected with contemporary works ; it is explained 
by anterior works. The author belongs to a school, the work 
belongs to a style. 

There is nobody who cannot distinguish the Greek style 
from the Gothic. Buither, in the same Greek style, there 
are the Doric, Ionian, and Corinthian; and in the Gothic 
style, one distinguishes primary, secondary and tertiarv 
styles. 



3 


If we consider from this point of view the architecture of 
the South of India, we can prove that here also exist very 
definite styles. It is necessary then to distinguish them one 
from the other and to determine exactly the character of each 
of them. 

But, first of all, let us examine a very important fact which 
will considerably simplify the question. By comparing the 
style of monuments with the paleographic indications given 
by the inscriptions engraved upon the monuments, we find 
that every style corresponds to a chronological epoch. 

Every edifice can perhaps be characterized by its orna- 
mentation ; but there exist others which have the same orna- 
mentation ; we can then prove that these other monuments 
date from the same epoch. Finally, if we examine the edifices 
which have a different style, we can prove that they are also of 
different epochs. Having then observed that monuments of 
one style are of the same age, we also come to the conclusion 
reciprocally that to every epoch there is, in the Dravidian 
country, only a single style. This is what we shall characterize 
as the 1 Principle of the Synchronism of Dravidian Styles.’ 

Thus then modem monuments do not resemble ancient 
monuments ; they are not of the same style. How are these 
changes produced ; at what epoch and for what reason have 
they stopped, constructing in a particular manner, and why 
again have they constructed in a different manner '? 

The first hypothesis which presents itself to the mind to 
expl ain these modifications is foreign influence. 

But in investigating the origin of styles, we have been led 
to discover a fact which we were very far from expecting, which 
nothing could make us guess, and which renders the study of 
Dravidian art extremely interesting . 1 That is that there has 
never been foreign influence. It is possible to find out in the 
ancient Dravidian monuments the origin of all the motifs of 
ornamentation which characterize the modern styles, and on 
the whole, Dravidian art has changed of itself. We shall ex- 

i Booent researches have led to the same conclusion in respect of Egyptian 
architecture as well. (7ii/s p. 38 note, and tho remarks of Lopsias translatedlin 
Appendix A of Egyptian Architecture by Edward Boll, Messrs. Bell & Sons 
London.).— S. K. 



4 

press this idea by saying that it has changed by ‘ the path of 
natural evolution.’ 

An analogous fact is produced by the French architecture 
of the Middle Ages. We know that the first idea was to explain 
origin its by the influence of barbarians, and we have given to 
French architecture the name Gothic. We see it written later 
on that the art appeared in consequence of the Saracenic 
conquests, or rather that the Ogival art had been imported into 
France on tjp return of the Crusaders from the country of the 
Mussulmans. It is only by the systematic study of the history 
of religious edifices of the Middle Ages that one arrives at the 
conclusion that the Gothic art is purely French, that it was 
born, not :upon the- banks of the Ehine or upon the shores of 
the Mediterranean, but in the ‘ lie de France,’ and that it is the 
‘ Bomanesquo Architecture ’ which, gradually by ‘ the path of 
natural evolution ’ has changed into Gothic. 

It is necessary, in reality, to distinguish between an 
Evolution ’ and a ‘ Bevolution ’. 

If, on account of 'a conquest; an invasion, a fashion, or 
other causes, the workmen of a country change at a certain 
epoch, their methods of work and begin > to employ motifs of 
ornamentation entirely different, for a long time, because they 
are inspired by motifs belonging to the style of another pountjry 
or another age, there is a revolution in architecture. 

In order that there may be an evolution, it is necessary 
that the change of motifs of ornamentation should be made 
gradually and by the very force of things. The workmen are 
not inspired by foreign motifs, but by the continual employment 
of their methods ; they are by themselves led to modify their 
technique. 

Thus, it is by the path of natural evolution that the 
‘Bomanesque Architecture’ has been transformed into the 
Gothic. It is also by ovolutiou that th^ Gothic has been 
transformed gradually until it became the Flamboyant ; but it 
is not by evolution, but by a sort of revolution, that, being 
inspired by Greek and Roman architectures, the French work- 
men abandoned almost completely the motifs which their 
ancestors had created and constructed the monuments which 
characterize the renaissance. 



5 


In France this evolution was very rapid. In the South 
of India, on account of the traditional conservatism of the 
Hindus this evolution was very slow, and it is during fourteen 
centuries that the architectural transformations were produced. 

The Dravidian art presents to us a very interesting and 
very rare picture of an architecture which remained, isolated 
for more than thirteen centuries, which borrowed nothing from 
foreign arts, but which varied continually by the path of 
natural evolution, in such a way that one could follow its 
modifications from one century to another. 

On the whole, in the South of India, every epoch has been 
marked' by a definite style, which is explained by the style of 
the preceding epoch and which serves to explain the style ol 
the following epoch; and the morphology of the' Dravidian 
monuments teaches us that the forms of architecture have been 
transformed slowly, just as the prehistoric anthropology shows, 
us that the human skull has passed through all the intermediary 
stages between the ape-like form and the actual human form. 
There is the same difference 'between the style of the Bathas. 
of the ' Seven-Pagodas ’ (M&mallapuram) and the style of the 
temple at Tiruppapuliynr. (Cuddalore, New Town), as between 
the skull of a man of ithe race of Cromagnon and the skull of 

The existence of a very definite architectural style in the 
Tamil country and the evolution of the style could he explained 

From ancient times up to our days, the pagodas have been 
constructed by workmen who formed an organized corporat- 


The master-masons constructed always according to the 
methods of their time with the motifs which their ancestors 
had transmitted to them. On account of the very special 
geographical position of Southern India, the workmen of the 
Tamil country were not always in direct communication with 

tiers IromYavana, co-operate! m _ ytt • ll 1O7-110). Thereiis a similar 

mouth of the Kaveri (Jfo* meMrotai, Canto XIX lh 10' ^^ ne] £ e y avaua 



6 


the workmen of other countries, and had never any occasion to 
be inspired by foreign styles. 

During several generations of workmen the manner of 
work of the sculptor remained almost invariable. But yet in 
the course of centuries the sculptural renderings were trans- 
formed insensibly. 

We shall not attempt to discover the causes of these 
modifications. This phenomenon is not particular to architect- 
ure ; it is general. The form of characters of the alphabet 
which were used in writing Tamil have been transformed in 
the course of centuries. The language has been transformed 
also, in the same manner as usages and manners have been 
gradually transformed. Religion itself has also been modified, 
and in oiu- days the rites and dogmas are not absolutely the 
same as those during the epoch of the Pailavas ; it is often very 
easy to distinguish a modern image from another move 
ancient. 

It is not then only by the architectural style that one re- 
cognizes the age of a monument, but also by iconography ; that, 
is to say the study of the images which adorn the temple ; but 
it is above all by the form of the characters of the alphabet of 
the inscriptions which are often engraved on the monument 
that this distinction can be made with safety if not with abso- 
lute certainty. We shall, however, confine ourselves here to 
the study of architectural forms according to the epochs and in 
estimating the age of the monument we shall rely upon the 
information furnished by epigraphy and palaeography. 

We shall choose them in the very restricted part of the 
Tamil country which we have selected (districts of Chingleput, 
North Arcot, South Axcot) a certain number of monuments the 
age of which has been well determined with the aid of inscrip- 
tions which are engraved on them, so as to have at least one 
specimen of architecture of each epoch. 

While comparing the monuments (one monument with 
another) we shall be able to verify the exactness of the princi- 
ples which we have enunciated. 

Besides acquainting ourselves thus with the different 
phases of architectural evolution with the aid of a very restrict- 
ed number of monuments we shall ‘ use the canons which we 



7 


shall have already established in order to fix the date of all the 
others by their external aspect alone. 

The archaeologist who knows these canons can also find 
out the age of edifices in the same manner as the geologist distin- 
guishes the age of sedimentary strata. He can know that such 
an edifice dates from the seventeenth century, depending only 
upon the motifs of ornamentation. It will be sufficient for him 
to observe the form of kudus or of the bodigais just as the 
geologist, guided by the form of the fossils, affirms that such a 
rock is primary because it contains trilobites, that such a layer 
is secondary or tertiary according as it contains ammonites or 
cerithes. 

In this little work, in which we attempt to show the evolu- 
tion of Bravidian architecture, we shall study only the motifs 
of ornamentation, that is to say, that which is due to the chisel 
of the sculptor, and we shall pass on in silence all that which 
is related to the art of the engineer. 

Such neglect will be incomprehensible in the study of the 
evolution of Gothic architecture. 

The object of French architects of the Middle Ages was to 
construct vaults with materials of small size, and the history 
of Gothic architecture is the history of the investigation of the 
proper disposition of these materials, that is the solution of a 
question of mechanics. 

The plan of edifices, the convergence of joints, the 
thrust of vaults were in the Gothic art primordial consider- 
ations. 

This is not the case in the Dravidian art. The Hindus of 
Southern India had never any necessity for solving such ques- 
tions, The great vimams such as those of Tanjore, the great 
gopurdms like those of Trichinopoly and Madura, are only 
heaping up of stone in which the art of the engineer is almost 
nothing. 

Nature permits the Hindu architect to construct immense 
halls or mantapcms by placing large slabs of granite upon 
monolithic pillars. The methods of construction are, therefore, 
very elementary ; the details of the sculpture are very interest- 
ing, and the history of the architecture of Southern India 
reduces itself to the history of ornamentation. 



8 


This study will he entirely independent of aesthetic con- 
siderations. It is incontestable that there are in the Dravidian 
art very beautiful things, but the appreciation of beauty is often 
a question of taste, and we do not pretend to make any criticism 
of art. We think that architecture can be interesting whatever 
be the opinion which one has of the aesthetic sense of the 
Hindus. By systematic observation of the rules according to 
which the edifices have been constructed and by the employ- 
ment of technical terms, we shall attempt to treat the subject 
in a purely scientific fashion. 



CHAPTER II 


CONTEMPOBABY AEGHITECTUBE 

Temples are still constructed in our own days, and although 
the modern workmen have before them European monuments, 
they are not inspired by the foreign motifs ; they build always 
following the architectural tradition which they have received 
from their ancestors. 

Neither does one see in the pagodas constructed in recent 
.times the triangular pediment of the Greeks, or the vaulted 
arch of the Bomans, or the pointed arches of France. It will 
be illogical, in fact, to build in Southern India according to 
methods created on another soil and in a different climate. 
Why construct vaults with convergent joints when one can 
employ huge slabs of granite; why construct pointed roofs inn 
sunny country? The pagodas with their immense circuits 
which contain ponds and pillared-halls are perfectly adapted to 
the Hindu civilization, and it will be difficult to replace them 
by the edifices intended for other civilizations. 

Just as animal species are subject to the law of ‘ Adapt- 
ation to the surroundings ’, architectural species adapt them- 
selves to materials, to societies and to climates. 

In order to study contemporary architecture, we must 
repair to temples in construction and speak to the workmen 
themselves, while they work in their stoneyard. 

We have had before us the plans which they use, we have 
been able to sketch and photograph the stones at the moment 
when the chisel shapes them in the form of capitals or of corbels. 
Finally we have asked the sculptors; and they have given .us 
written in Tamil, and orally, the names of every motif, of every 
moulding. That is the technical information which we shall 
try to recapitulate here. 

This information we have obtained mostly while interrog- 
ating the workmen who constructed the pagoda of Tirupfi- 
puliy&r (Cuddalore, New Town). 



10 


1. The Dravidian Order 

One calls order, a horizontal division of architecture con- 
sidered only with respect to decoration. In other words, .when 
one considers monuments, which belong to the same order, one 
proves that they present the same superposition of basement, 
of pillar, of entablature, adorned in the same kind of moulding. 

In Greek art, there exist three principal orders, called 
Doric, Ionian, and Corinthian which are well known. 

In Dravidian art, there exists only one order, which we 
shall call the ‘ Dravidian order. ’ 

Figure 17 (A) shows the name of every moulding. 

It is necessary, however, to add some explanations. 

1. The pedestal upapitmi (a_uiA_i i) is sometimes more 
simple, sometimes more ornamental than the type which we 
give here. 

2. In the base a&itfancim ) the moulding 

called padmarn (uixu) which is a sort of doucine represented 
hy.the petals of a lotus. It is not indispensable, because in 
certain parts of edifices, it is sometimes suppressed. 

The moulding called kumudam (®go,#ii) is here a blunt 
corner [chamfered string-course (fillet) ] but is sometimes a 
tore. 

The moulding called agrapattiyal <u<») is a listel. 

Very' often it is found replaced by a kabodam (tQuir/fd) 
surmounted by a yabm (ward). The two mouldings are 
identical to those which we shall describe further on, while 
speaking of the entablement prastaram (u/revjtini). 

3. The pilaster sta-mbham >) is sometimes square 

in section, and at other times octagonal. Often one sees a 
little ornament called n&ggbandham (wsuipii). 

Figure 1 represents the capital upon a very large scale. 
We give to this kind of capital the name of ‘ bulbous ’ capital 
on account of its bulbous form. 



11 


The palagi (u<wa »*) corresponds to abacus, 
ported by the petals of a lotus called idal (g )pjjj) 



t-tb Kan dam (San. kantham) 
u tarns palagi. 
munai. 
idal. 

< 25 <_u> kuiam. 

(San. Tatica). 


«€Ddrii) kalasam, 
u^iou^i padmabandam. 
srreo kftl. 


It is sup- 


Eig, 1. Bulbous capital. 

Figure 2 represents with more technical details the corbel 
in the form of a flower which surmounts the capital and 
which is called puspabodigai (Lfd^u'lun^sns). 

4. . The entablement consists of four members uttiram 
(® eradakam {swrfsnw), kabudam {sQuvpi), and yalam 
( v it aril ). 

The larmier kabbdam (atJuv^ii) is always ornamented 
with the kudu (*_®) 1 



(madal&i). 


L(6^u Gun$6»a pushpabodigai. 

Fig. 2. Flowery Corbel. 


i In regard of these conventional forms the following remarks of Lepsins 
would be useful. For even the 1 heraldic style ’ has still its recognized place, 
and is a conventional but not an ignorant or barbarous conception such as any 
individual may at his pleasure repudiate. Even the real artist would not 
disdain this style in its proper place, but rather would impress it with bis own 
mark which the real oonnoisseur would recognize. 

Convention, if not always so comprehensible as in this case, was at all 
periods, as it is still, an important, nay an indispensable element in art. ’ (Bell’s 
Egyptian Architecturi Quoted above, pp. 214 and 15). S.K. 




12 


Figure 3 represents two kMu one (B) ornamented, the other 
(A) simple. The central part is called gandkanamukham 
(sip TsagMii) because there is often in that place the head of a 
gandhma. The central part is surrounded with foliage 
called Mi (0«if). The upper part is adorned with the head 
of a lion simha-imkham (diisiyMii) 



S 


13 


The moulding called ya] am (vide Fig 4) is so called be- 
cause it is decorated with lions with the trank of an elephant 
called ydli. (<uraD). 

5. The attic is formed of different kinds of little 
pavilions. The form of the pavilions differs according to their 
position upon the edifice. Those which are at the angles of the 
edifice (Fig. 4) are called harnakHeu («« w*.®); they have a 
roof of square or circular section and are surrounded by a single 
ami, stipi (wgnSf). ■ Those which are placed in the middle 
are called salai (*»ta;). They have an elongated roof and 
have three stupis. Between the Jiarmkilhi and the (salai) are 
found some kinds of little windows called panjaram (u&fta). 



Karnakndu. Panjaram. Bftlai. 


Fig. L Attic— [Note : the size of the Karnak&itt is double that of the Panjaram ; 
hut it is only of the size of the S&lai. 


14 


Figure 5 gives an idea of the disposition and the. form of 
the pavilion of a modern temple. 

In front of the pavilions are placed frequently statues of 
baked earth, representing personages, who are mostly gods. 
Concerning the relative dimensions of the, different parts 
of the edifice, it is of importance to note that, if one takes them 
asoombined, the height of the adiihUinam i S 2, 

the part called sfamlhtm amounts to 1, and the 

part called putshmm {utMtni) to a height equal to 1 {vide 
Fig. 1). 

■2. Ohnamkxtatuiv of Wants 
Dravidian monuments are not generally made of windows. 
The walls cannot, however, remain hare. One employs two 
kinds of ornaments. 



iia The niche, yufta- 

panjaram 

is intended to 
contain images of divi- 
nities sculptur'd in high 
relief. Nevertheless they 
often remain empty. 


aaitsjo-ugaffih 

7if. 0. Q4ft*pN>{tnia 



Fig. 5. Upper Part of a Modern temple (at Tiru-pSppuliyar) showing the 
disposition of the pavilion. 




15 


Figure 6 shows the ornamentation of the frame of a niche. 
On either side of the niche are pilasters and above it a little 
pavilion, which, as the name indicates; ought to be a panjarom, 
but which is often (as in Fig. 6) a sdlai. 

The niches adorn generally the parts of walls which project 
in the front. 

The parts of the edifice which are found in the background 
(in retreat) are adorned by the kumbhapanjaram.. 

(b) The kumbhapanjaram (tgu>,ju&eiru) is a pilaster the 
rcile of which is purely decorative (Fig. 7). 



(gihuuQffmh 

Fig. 7. Kumbhapanjaram. 

As its name indicates, the pilaster is characterized bv two 
motifs ;■ in the lower part a sort of vase called hmbhani, and 
the upper part a little pavilion (panjaram). 



16 


3. The Edifices 

Figure 8 is the plan of a temple of Siva in its essential 
dispositions; 


it 






Fig. 8. Plan of a temple of Sit a 

(1) Vimiiua ri) in tlie oentre at which is found the sanctuary 
Garbhagthatn («> uS®u»A) in the midle of which is found the Lingarn 

( 0 ) Jtantapam (irsArL—uA) (3) Nandi 

(1) Pvajastambam tjs&S&pbui) (5) Balipltam (usS?t_i) 

(fl) Eastern Gdpuram (Ssripu) (7) Kaly&na-mantanam (m&irawm&ri-ui) 
(8) Sanctuary of Natesa (tOi-rA) 

(3) Sanctuary of PStvati (urfa#) (The sanctuary of PSvrati ought to be 
placed. in front of the Gopuram at the South). 

(10) Sanctuary of Subramaniar (*ijfJric9*#iuf-) 

(11) Sanctuary of PillSySr (tfsHbruir) 

(12) Tank (kulam, ®ari) 

(13) Sorrounding wall (madil, u#a>) 

(14) South tiBptiram 

(16) T8t (Ofi) (16) Ladder with steps to mount oar 





17 


The buildings -which constitute the pagoda Ko-il or Koyil, 
(®*r«S«u) are generally grouped. without much order. 

Nevertheless the pagoda ought to be oriented, that is to 
say, the gate of the sanctuary and in general all the gates 
which lead to the sanctuary ought to be turned to the east, in 
such a manner that it often happens that the sun, in rising on 
certain days in the year, throws its light on the Lingam 
which is in the sanctuary. 

At the entrance to the temple are found one or more cars 
(in Tamil, Ur Q sw) which serve to carry the gods in the proces- 
sions on festival days. 

The lower part of the car is made of a special kind of wood 
of a tree of the family Bassia, called in Tamil ilnppai (@$*u »u.) 

The monumental entrances of the temples are called 
gopurams {Ssmjnu,). 

The principal is the one on the east ; there ought to be a 
gnpuram also on the south ; those on the north and the west 
are optional. 

Figure 9 gives very simple examples of gnpuram. 



Garrqirib 


Fig 9 GSpnrun. 


3 


18 


The door vdyil or vasal (a>iraS®> or «»■*«>) is ordinarily 
twice as high as it is wide. The height is often considerable. 
The two shutters (flaps of a door) are made of wood and have 
partitions. 

The number of stages nilad (<#&#) is always odd. Starting 
from nine stages, a gopumm can be considered as being of the 
first greatness. 

The stages are ornamented with little pavilions (salai) 
and Tcarnakudu (sismsJS). 

The salai in the middle is prominent, much bigger than 
the others, and pierced with a window (the only one in the 
front). Before the pavilions, some statues of baked earth repre- 
sent the divinities of worship which belong to the pagoda. 

Among the statues, there are those which are obligatory : 
they are dvarapdlas (jaj* turns, door-keepers), on either side 
of the window. They are turned towards the window, to ■which 
they point. The one which is turned to the right side places 
the left foot upon a club placed on the right, and inversely. . 

It is to be remarked that the number and the disposition 
of the pavilions are the same at every floor (stage), only the 
dimensions vary. 

When the gopurams are new, they are painted completely 
and the statues, which adorn them, are painted in richer colours. 

The surrounding walls, ( madil ) of which the gopurams 

form the entrance are rectangular, surmounted with figures 
representing the bull (Nandi). It is a statue of Garuda when 
the temple is dedicated to Vishnn. 



19 


When one enters by the gopuram on the east of a temple 
of Siva one finds successively before him the balipltam (the 
seat of sacrifice), the dvajastcmbham and the 

Nandi ( vide Fig. 10). 



Fig. 10. Insignia in a temple with Siva. (The Lingam is seen in a side.) 

Within the walls of temples are found’sacred tanks hulcm 
(garii) and mcmtapams (weht-uii), resting places where the 
gods are every year carried on festival days (Fig. 11). 



OfrS.'&coa; 

Kodungai 


iosnrt-uic 

Iftlantapam 


1 g. U. Mantap&m — One will notice the Cornice with double curves 
which bears the name Kodungai. 



20 


The mantapam are not furnished with walls ; the roofing 
is formed of large slabs of granite supported by monolithic 
pillars. 

The base of the edifice is an adistanam identical with 
that which we have described formerly. One gets- to the 
upper part of that base by a ladder, the balustrade of which is 
sculptured as indicated in figure 12. 



&iri4-yaji 

Fig. 12. Stops up to a Mantapam. 


The kind of pillar used principally in the mantapcms is 
the pillar with a cubical capital called tun 

Figure 13 which represents a little mantapam at TirupS- 
puliyur shows the view of that kind of pillar. One will find 
the picture of a tun with the technical terms explained in 
Figure 14. 



Pig. 13. Mantapam Tirapapuliyflr. 






21 



Pfctam 


Sadumm 



ifir&urspii 

Nagabandham 




A4va-pAdam 

Fig. 14. Ttt » {pillar with modern cubical capital). 

The pillar is always raised by a base asmpddam. It is 
formed of three cubical parts called iaduram and of 

two prismatic parts with facets called pattai (utL«®i_). 

One sees often upon the tm, as upon the pillar with the 
cubical capital, the little ornament called (nagabandliam ; 
isirsuijtu.) because its form recalls that of the hood of a cobra 
(nag a). 

.The pillar with the bulbous capital (Fig. 2): is rarely 
used alone to support the vaults of. marJapams ; but a very 
frequent and even almost general case is that of the associa- 



22 


tion of pillar with a bulbous capital, and that with a cubical 
capital in one and the same stone called ( mivettiJckSl 

^SSS^Q-SULil^-SeSfr^). 

Figure 15 is the reproduction of a design representing an 
mivettikMl supporting a vault. 





«#sref 

D 

Alavu- 
ufctir&m 
iWigpp* Napudal 

(yjtluj-ffi/if/u 

Mttfctivandaro 

(Sans-mustibaudham) 


3 

T5 

8»i 

>t3 

& 


hj 


S3 
t -i 
S3 

& 

£ 


05 

<i 

SC! 

B 

B' 

ssi 

«* 

fir* 

83 

>1 


23 


This design, as the autographic address on one side indic- 
ates, has been made by the architect of the temple of Tirupa- 
puliyur, M. S. SvaminStha AS&ri, $ri Patalesvaran Koil, 
TirupSpnliyur. 

Very often the pillar with the bulbous capital of the ani- 
vettikkal is replaced by a rearing animal, a horse or a lion 
( simha ) or a lion with the trunk of an elephant (yap). 

The sanctuary (garbhagrJiam) occupies the middle of a 
temple surmounted by a tower aptly call (etimezw). 



eSutirearui 
Fig. 16. Vimtea. 


The divinity is always placed in the middle of the gar- 
bhagrham upon a pedestal called avudaiydr which 

serves to receive the liquid matter with which the god is 
bathed, and to throw it out of the sanctum by means of a 
channel called gomukham 

The garbhagrham is often called mUlasth&nam. 

Let us add finally that the course which surrounds the 
sanctuary bears the name of snttupprSTcaram (x/i&uinrsnirti). 


CHAPTER HI 


PALLAVA ARCHITECTURE 

In the preceding chapter, we have reviewed the principal ele- 
ments which constitute modem architecture, and we have 
understood what the technical terms used to designate them, 
are. 

It is with the aid of this knowledge that we undertake in 
this chapter the study of Pallava architecture. 

Now, in studying this architecture we shall make two 
statements which are of capital importance. 

1. The Pallava monuments which are the most ancient 
known in the Tamil country can alone make us know the 
origin of Dravidian art; thus while examining the constitu- 
tion of the elements of Pallava architecture, we shall observe 
the very important fact that the works in stone are the copy of 
works in wood ; and that the primitive type with which the 
architects are inspired are no other than that of the worker in 
wood, made into beams and planks, which was utilized in 
Southern India at the beginning of onr era, and which is repre- 
sented by the bas-reliefs of the stupa at Amaravati. 

The Pallava temple is derived from the primitive hut, 1 
and the Dravidian art is then of purely indigenous origin. 

2. If now we compare the Pallava architecture with 
modem architecture, one notices the fact, which is not less im- 
portant, that the differences are of little importance ; that these 
differences are in the details of secondary importance ; but that 
the elements themselves remain the same ; that there is not 
any motif of the modem art which one does not find, with but 
slight modification in the Pallava art. 

l Ibis la exactly the conclusion arrived at In regard to all Indian architect- 
ure by Mr. Havel] (vide Chapter II, Ancient and Medieval Architecture of 
India, John Murray). In reapeot of tome element* at any rate this la true ot 
Egyptian architecture (see p. 88 and note). The Architecture of Anoint Boy ft 
quoted already. S. K. 







Kg. n (B) Palluva 



25 


From that time, when in the next chapter, we shall have 
shown that the modifications of details are produced progress- 
ively and slowly in the course of centuries, it will appear clear- 
ly that the Dravidian art, even as we have affirmed in Chapter 
I, is an art purely indigenous and that it has been transformed 
only by the path of natural evolution. 

Pallava monuments are met with all over that part of 
the Tamil country which we have specially studied, which 
includes the three districts of North Arcot, Chingleput and 
South Arcot, and which formed that ‘ Tondaimandalam ’ of 
which the capital Kaiichlpuram was that of the Paliavas. 

Figure 17 (B) represents the Dravidian Pallava order, 

It is necessary to remark that at first sight this order 
does not differ at all from the modem order which we have 
represented in Fig. 17 (A). 

The two Figures 17 (A) and 17 (B) are, however, not identi- 
cal, because if the order is the same in the two cases, the 
details of sculpture show differences. 

In the first place then we may remark the following fact : 
to know the age of a Dravidian monument, it is essential to 
study with very great attention the details of ornamentation, 
because the main lines are the same. 

Let us now compare every one of the parts of the figures 17 
(A)' and 17 (B). 

The pedestal yipapitam) is wanting in very many of the 
Pallava monuments. Tt exists, however, in many of the others, 
e.g. in the base of the temple of Muktes'vara at Kaiichipuram. 
(Plate XIX of Pallava Architecture by A. Rea.) 

The base ( adutmam ) is almost identical in’ the figures 17 
(A) and 17 (B). 

We shall pass on next to the pilaster (stambham). 

The shaft of a column ( kal ) is almost identical with the 
modem shaft. The Pallava shaft is always without niiga- 
handham, an ornament which did not perhaps make its appear- 
ance till the twelfth century. 

The Pallava bulbous capital is identical with the modem 
bulbous capital with the Only difference that the moulding 
called i(M is provided wilii indentations (notches). The 
notches of the idal made their appearance only in the twelfth 
century. 



26 


In many of the Pallava monuments the abacus {pahgai) 
is purely and simply suppressed. In our days, on the contrary, 
th epalagai exists always in the bulbous capital. 

The corbel which is above the abacus differs entirely from 
the modern bbdigai. 

The Pallava corbel is very simple : its profile is generally 
curved and it represents certainly the extremity of a joist. 

In figure 18 one will see the simplest form of a Pallava 
corbel at M&mallapuram. 

Very often, however, the corbel presents horizontal mould- 
ings (figure 19). The motif is very probably borrowed from the 
art of the carpenter. The lines which follow seem to establish 
the fact : 



Pig, 19. P»U»v» corbel ornamented with mouldings in scrolls. 


[Dictionnaire de l’architecture fran$aise du XI e au XVI f 
«8cle, par Violet-le-Duc. IV. p. 309 — corbel] ‘ . . . The 
1 tradition of coverings in carpentry makes itself felt by the 



Fig. JLH. Interior of a cave at M Small apu ram. -One will notice the 
oillarand the corbel which supports the vault. 





27 


‘presence of corbels which are placed under the tablettes 
‘ (tables) of cornices up to the end of the twelfth century.' 

‘ The church of Notre-Dame-du-Port, at Clermont, that 
1 of Saint Etienne of Nevers, possess cornices with corbels ■very 
; interesting to observe. ... It is evidently the imitation of an 
' end of a worked joist. The cylinders which accompany the 
‘ principal nerve are no other than the shavings produced by 
' the hand of the carpenter to remove the nerve from the 
1 middle. 

‘ It is sufficient to. know how the workman can, with the 
' chisel ( besaigne ) scoop out the end of a joist so as to reserve 
1 a supply, in order to know that the shavings, obtained with 
1 the work of the carpenter, reproduce the cylinders. The 
1 workman will remove from the two sides of the joist, with his 
‘ sharp chisel, a series of chips so as not to. split his wood ; then 
1 he will cut them at their base, if he wishes to remove the 
1 renfort completely. Seeing that the shavings form an orna- 
1 rnent one will have the idea at first of not cutting them at all, 
1 and the joists will have thus been placed. Later on, this 
' decoration produced by the method of execution employed by 
' the workman, will have been worked out in stone.’ 



No. 


28 



o 

6 



Very often the 
corbel does not have a 
curved profile blit 
presents simply the ap- 
pearance of the extre- 
mity of a joist which 
has been chamfered. 
(Fig. 20, No. 1.) 

It is necessary, 
however, to remark 
that the circular form 
(No. *2 of Fig. 20) was 
peculiar to the Pallava 
epoch, while the other 
form (No, 1 of Fig. 20) 
would exist two or 
three centuries after the 
l'allava epoch. 



The larmier ( kabodam ) is ornamented, as in our days with 
kudu but sufficiently different from the modern kudu. 

One should remember that the modern kudu is character- 
ized by the head of a lion ( simha ), situated at the upper part 
and that from the mouth of the lion come out leaves. 

The Pallava kudu 1 is characterized by the fact that there is 
no head of a lion on the upper part but that in that place there 
is an ornament of special form to which we give the name of 
‘ the head of a shovel ' on account of its likeness to a shovel. 

The 1 head of a shovel ’ is a distinct characteristic of the 
kudu of the Pallavas. 

Figure .21 represents two kinds of kudus of the Pallava- 
epoch. 



Fig. 21, Pallava k&du with shade. 


1 Tho kudu seems reminiscent of a thatched roof. This roof has to be 
broken open in the places where the upright posts and the horizontal beams 
*joih. . When coeoanut plaits are the material of roofing, these are bent over at 
the place letting in a little light* and providing an opening for-acooss of air. 
When the thatoh gave place to other kinds of roofing this adjunct of 
necessity remained an ornament. S. K. 



30 


The form No. 1, Figure ‘21 shows that althoughthe ku<lu 
is no other thing than a little gable end, it is a new proof of 
the fact that the Pallava architecture is derived from the art 
of the carpenter. 

The kudu is no other than the extremity of a roof in the 
form of a vault. One meets with it frequently in the Buddhis- 
tic buildings and in particular those of the tope at Amaravati 
(fig. 22). 

The Pallava kudu of the kind No. 1, Figure 21 is character- 
ized by the presence of a little roof placed in the centre and 
forming a sort of a little shed. 

On the contrary the kind of kudu No. 2 is distinguished by 
the head of a Gandhana in its centre. The kudu being in fact 
a gablo-end could serve as a skylight (a garret-window) and 
that is what justifies the presence of a human head which 
appears to look through the Window. 



Pig. 21. f^o. 2) Pallava KflAvt ’tyitii the head of Gandh&rva. 

The Gcmdhdrm has the characteristic aspect of the Pallava 
epoch, by its abundant hair and its two big ear-rings. 

The part of the edifice called kal which serves as a pedestal 
to the pavilion and which is indispensable in the modern art 
does not often exist in the Pallava art. Th e'rathas of Mamalla- 
puram do not always possess those. 


31 


It exists nevertheless in all the P allava monuments of 
Kanchipuram, 



One will see by comparing Figure 17 (A) and Figure 17 (B) 
that the Pallava kal differs from the modern kal with regard 
to the detail that in the Pallava architecture the kal lias two. 
windows while there is only one in modern architecture. 

Figure 23, which represents two pavilions of Pharmaraja 
Batha at Mamallapuram shows very well that in the beginning 
the pavilions were copies of little edifices of wood. One 


32 


will specially notice that there exists a balustrade formed from 
beams of wood crossing one another which is very characteristic 
(cf. Figures 23 and 24.). 







Slil 



Pig. 23. Pavilions oi the Dhavmariijai'atha at Mimallapuram. 


The tops ( stupis , ) which decorate the crown-posts of roofs 
have very probably an origin which is explained by the con- 
struction in wood of the pavilions. The beams which support 
the vault being made of wood, run the risk of rotting on account 
of the influence of rain water. The upper extremities of the 
beams are covered with pots of baked earth which protect them. 
This is undoubtedly the origin of stupis }■ 

It is necessary finally to speak of the pillar with a cubical 
capital which is found very often in Pallava caves. 

1 The inverted pot can be seen in all the more substantially erected sheds 
of the locality even now. In the case of conical roofs it is a single pot and in 
the case of long sheds there is a line of .them, the number varyuur with the 
number of posts.— (8. IC.) 





Fig. 24. * Arjuna Batha * of MSmaliapuram. 




33 


Figure 25 represents a pillar of the kind with more of 
details. It differs from a modern tun represented in figure 14 in 
that essential detail that the Pallava tun has its edges bent in 
the middle only. It has then two cubical parts and not three 
as in figure 14. The cubical parts are ornamented with the 
flowers of the lotus almost analogus to the flowers of lotus 
which .adorn the rails of Buddhistic monuments. 



Fig. 25. Pillar with, a cubical capital ol the PaUara pcriocl. 


The form of the pillar with the cubical capital of the 
Pallava epoch indicates .clearly its origin. It is simply a 
square beam of which the sides have been bent in the middle 
of its height., reminding us thus of the appearance of the' rails ’ 
in wood of the Buddhistic stupas. 

What we have said in this chapter is sufficient to show 
undoubtedly 

1, that the Pallava architecture does not differ essentially 
from modern architecture and that the differences are only in 
details of ornamentation. 

5 



34 


2. that the Pallava architecture is derived directly from 
the art of the carpenter and that the temples of the Pallavas are 
only the copy in stone of the house built of wood. 

From the latter point we shall deduce the following 
inferences : — 

1. If there do not exist in Southern India monuments 
prior to the seventh century, it is because the temples, monast- 
eries, etc., ought to have been built in wood before that epoch. 

2. From the very beginning Dravidian art is a purely 
indigenous art. 

In the following chapter we shall .try to show that the 
differences which exist between Pallava art and modem art 
are the result of a very slow evolution and that the motifs of 
ornamentation have been transformed only because the work- 
men have attempted to perfect their modes of decoration. 1 


l For more ample information regarding Pallava architecture, the reader 
is recommended to consult Pallava Antiquities by the same author, with 
thirty-two plates— published by Probethain Co., 41, Great Bussell Street, 
London, 191(5.— (S. K.) 



CHAPTER IV 

THE EVOLUTION OE MOTIFS 

We hate said in the preceding chapters that there are 
very few essential differences between the most ancient 
and the most modem temples. The differences are those of 
details only. ■ It is essential then to study carefully those of 
the details which have varied most in the course of centuries, 
and to trace the history of the motifs of ornamentation in 
order to characterize the different phases of the evolution of 
Dravidian architecture. The motifs of ornamentation are not 
all indeed equally evolved. In the same space of time, certain 
parts of an edifice have changed very much, while others have 
not changed in form. Thus then, in order to ascertain the 
age of a monument with certain approximation, it is necessary 
to examine particularly the motifs, which have evolved in a 
very characteristic manner. It is the study of these transfor- 
mations which we shall enter on first. . 

In the second place it is essential to recall here that we 
are studying specially the monuments of the three districts of 
North Arcot, Chingleput and South Arcot. The study of the 
evolution of Dravidian architecture will thus be less general 
perhaps, but more precise. One understands indeed that the 
same motifs of ornamentation could, at a particular epoch, not 
have absolutely the same form in the north and in the south 
of the Tamil country. One can then formulate a law while 
studying a very limited region. 

Finally, we do not pretend to study all the temples of .the 
region in order to compare the architecture of every part of the 
'edifice with the inscriptions engraved thereon. However 
restricted may be the region which we shall study,, to study 
absolutely all' the temples of that region will of necessity make 
very considerable work. 

Here then is exactly the point in question. 

In the course of numerous journeys which we have made 
in that part of the Tamil country which adjoins Pondicherry 
(districts of North Arcot, Chingleput and South Arcot), we 



36 


believe we have noticed certain principles, certain general laws, 
which are always found to be verified. 

These principles we are going to expound here, while 
proposing to consider them as demonstrated until they are 
proved to the contrary. 

It is essential then to archeologists and to epigraphists of 
the Tamil country to verify the accuracy of what we have 
advanced. 

Let us hope that the final verifications will only confirm 
what we have affirmed, 

In order to follow pretty closely the evolution of the 
architecture, it is necessary to group century by century the 
monuments, the age of which is well known. 

We cannot do this in such a small work as the present 
one; yet we shall divide-the history of the architecture into a 
small number of periods. It appears to us that this history 
could be divided into five epochs, almost equal in duration, 
each lasting about 250 years. 

This division is purely arbitrary, since art has changed by 
insensible evolution and not in a discontinuous manner; 
Nevertheless this division into five periods appears to us to be 
useful for the convenience of discussion. The five epochs are 
the following 

1. Pallava epoch (a.d. 600 to 850). 

2. Early Ohsla, epoch (a.d. 850 to 1100). 

3. Later Choia epoch (a.d. 1100 to 1350). 

i. Vijayanagar epoch (a.d. 1350 to 1600). 

.5. Modern epoch (a.d. 1600 to the present time). 

The names of the first four epochs are those of the royal 
dynasties whieh ruled successively in the Tamil country. 
These names of dynasties are found in most of the inscriptions 
engraved upon the temples and their choice for characterizing 
the styles is always indicated. 

As examples of the monuments of the different epochs let 
us consider 

1. for the Pallava epoch, the mthas and caves of 
Mamallapuram and the temples of Kailasan&tha and Vai- 
kuntha Perumal at Kafichipuram ; 

2. for early Chsja epoch, the temple which I discovered 
at Dadapuram (South Aroot District; Tindivaflam Taluk). 





Fig. 26. Southern facade of the temple of Siva at Dad&puram (early chola 
style) the lower\part of the photograph shews the inscription of Rftjaraja whic*i 
is engraved upon the same facade of the temple. 



37 


The temple, which bears an inscription of Rajarfija (figure 26) 
presents two peculiarities 

(a) hot having been restored in such a way that from 
the base to the summit, it presents all the distinct characteris- 
tics of a temple of the tenth century ; (i) being well sculptured, 
it can be considered as a very honourable type of the style 
of ‘ Early Chola 

3. For the ‘ Later Chola ’ period, 1 the east gopuram at 
Chidambaram which dates from the king Kopperunjinga ’ who 
was' a contemporary of the Chola king Rajaraja III (G.O. 
Report for 1913-4, Part II, p. 82 and G.O. Report for 1905-6, 
Part II, paragraph 5.) 

4. The monuments of the ■ epoch of Vijayanagar are 
very numerous. They are, for example, the gopurams of the 
pagoda of VillianiTr (near Pondicherry). 

5. Lastly for the contemporary period, we have already 
chosen the temple of Tirupapuliyiir (Ouddalpre Hew Town) 
which is not yet completed. 

When there is a development by the path of evolution, one 
finds often that every period is characterized by the predomi- 
nance of certain types. 

In the preceding periods, certain forms exist only in the 
embryonic stage, then all of a sudden they undergo considerable 
development ; after some time they become atrophied, and end 
sometimes by disappearing. 

It is this which one can observe in the evolution of the 
Dravidian art. Let us consider, for example, the general form 
of buildings. 

Rock-cut temples exist only in the Pallava period. 

In the early Chola period, it is the sanctuary of the temple, 
which one calls the virndna, that assumes all of a sudden 
gigantic proportions, and it is this part of the edifice to which 
the architects give all their care. It is the epoch of grand 
vimanas of Tanjore and of Gangaikondapuram which rise up 
to 190 feet in height and which are magnificently ornamented. 
In the following epochs, the mmdna got atrophied, and was 
reduced to a pagoda, a few metres in height. 

In the monuments prior to the later Chola- period, one 
finds only the embryo of the g'pumms. The temple of 



38 


Eailssanatha at Kafichipuram has only a miniature gopuram. 
Those of the temple of Tanjore (Early Chola period) already a 
little more elevated, but it is at the later Chola epoch that we 
find very grand and very beautiful gnpurams of Chidambaram 
and JambukeSvaram. 

At the epoch of Vijayanagar, they constructed still immense 
girpurams, but it is easy to notice that this part of the edifice 
was not the most cared for; it is not upon these that the 
sculptor concentrated his efforts. At the Vijayanagar epoch, 
one sees a form of construction appear, which the former 
epochs did not know; it is the mantapam, the resting place, 
where the gods are every year carried, which arrests the 
attention everywhere by its monolithic pillars, on which are 
sculptured horses, rearing lions and the gods everywhere. 
The Icalydm maniapam of Hampi, of Conjeeveram, of 
Vellore, axe characteristics of the art of the period. 

The modern style is above all (especially) distinguished by 
its corridorB. The most celebrated part of the temple of 
Madura is the Pudumantapam, which is only a vast corridor. 
But it is in the temple of Bamesvaram, that the predominance 
of corridors becomes manifest. 

On the whole we can say that the Pallava period is that of 
sculptural rocks. The Early Chola period that of grand 
vimanas, the Later Chola period that of the most beautiful 
ynpurams. The Vijayanagar period is that of imntapams. 
The modern period that of corridors. 

The question of the history of the motifs of ornamentation 
arises in the following manner. 

We have said that there are no essential differences 
between the styles of successive epochs of the history of archi- 
tecture. 

When an observer finds himself in the presence of a Dra- 
vidian monument, he will be greatly embarrassed in determining 
approximately the age of a monument. In fact, in order to 
distinguish the degree of antiquity of a Dravidian edifice it is 
necessarv>ahnost always to consider almost all the details of 
architecture. 

It is essential then to determine certain rules necessary 
for, at least useful in, their appreciation. 



39 


1. The Cokbel 

Of all the parts of the edifice, that part, the form of which 
has varied in the most characteristic fashion is perhaps ‘ the 
corbel ’ which is placed below the capital of the pillars and of 
which we have already spoken. 

Figure 27 shows the form of the corbel at different epochs. 
Nevertheless it is necessary to make a number of observations 
on the subject. 


(l) 

IMUva-.t.D. 600 to SOO 



( 2 ). 

Early Chola a.d. 850 to 1100 


(31 

Later Chola a.d. 1100 to 1300 



Big. 27. CorbelB characteristic o£ the clifierept pciiods 



40 


The corbel with a curved profile (1) Figure 27 sometimes 
simple, sometimes ornamented with ‘ rollers ’ of which we haye 
spoken in the preceding chapter is exclusively Pallava. Never- 
theless it is not the only one employed since frequently enough 
one finds the form (2) in the Pallava monuments. 

It is still essential to say that this form is the most 
generally used at the Pallava epoch. 

Never, in any Pallava monument, does one see the forms 
[3), (4) and (5). 

For example never does one see the pushpabudigai in the 
ancient temples ; we affirm likewise that if one had just dis- 
covered a pushpabudigai which can be attributed in a certain 
manner to the Pallava epoch, we shall abandon immediately 
all idea of evolution of the Dravidian art ; th e pushpabudigai is 
essentially an ornament of the recent epoch. 

The form (2) which is met with sometimes in the Pallava 
epoch is very general in the ‘ Early Chola ’ epoch ; but it dis- 
appeared completely in the other epochs. 

The form (3) which appeared only at the end of the ‘ Early 
Chola ’ and which is almost general at the ‘ Later Chola ’ 
epoch did not disappear in the following epochs. It is met 
with still frequently at the epoch of Vijayanagar. But it is 
not the form (3) alone which was in use in the ‘ Later Chola ’ 
epoch. In many of the monuments the corbel is fashioned in 
the fonn ol doudiws and little by little the form (3) becomes 
transformed into the form (4) which is that of (the flowers) of 
lotus falling down (drooping). 

At the end of the ‘ Later Chola ’ epoch, the monuments 
present often a peculiarity; the corbels which have already 
been completed, and taken the form (4), appear during the same 
like the corbels of the form (3). 

The form (4) is distinguished from form (5) by the fact that, 
in the form (5), the flower of the lotus {p-ushpa) is completely 
detached from the rest of the stone and is terminated by a sort 
of finial ( pumunai ). Let us not think that the form (5) existed 
before the sixteenth century. 



41 


The history of the ‘ Dravidian corbel ’ (figures 28 and 29) 
illustrates very well the meaning of the expression, evolution of 
the Dravidian art. 

Pallsva Early ohola Later chola Vijayanagar Modam 
Fig. 28. Evolution of the Corbel (view of three quarters) 



e 

■■El 

rrptturjiszs 
SSda bodigai 

■ 1 

wu 


L 

pii<§tur$tis,s 
Tarangu bodigai 

L 


Pailava 


Early ahola 


Later ohola 


qt^uQuir^eos 

Pushpahodigai 



/ijayanagar 


Modern 


Fig. 29. History o.f the bodigai 


The ancient forms are derived from the art of the carpen- 
ter ; the corbel is no other than the extremity of beams cut 
with the blows of the hatchet. 

The modem forms of bodigai are explained by the care 
which the sculptor has bestowed upon the stone to embellish 
that part of the edifice. 



42 


By what has preceded one sees that ‘ the Dra vidian corbel ’ 
has often the same form at different epochs; that does not 
suffice the to indicate the age of an edifice. 

2. ‘ IOAL : AND ‘NAGABANDHAM’ 

We have said that the part of the capital which supports 
the abacus (palagcti) is called idal. 

The idal has the form of the calyx of a flower of lotus. 
Thus in Pallava and Early Chola epochs, the petals of the 
flower were not represented. Oil the contrary in the later 
Chola, Vijayanagar and Madura epochs, the extremity of the 
petals were represented in such a manner that below the abacus 
it appeal's to have a series of indentations (figure 80). The 
indentations go by the name of rmmai ((jo&w) in Tamil. 



Fig 30. C»piial withont Munai Capital with Munai 


We have already remarked that the ornament called 
Nagabandham on account of its resemblance to the ‘ hood of a 
cobra ’ which adorns almost all the pillars of the modem epoch 
does not exist in the Pallava epoch. 

It made its appearance in the same epoch as the indent- 
ations of the idal, i.e. to say at the end of the ‘ Later Chola ’ 
epoch! 

One can then say that every pillar on which one sees an idal 
indented and nagabandham is posterior to the twelth oentury. 


43 


Figure 31 .shows the evolution of the pillar with bulbous 
capital where one can see the history of the three types which 
we have studied till now; the corbel, the idal and the 
mgabmdham. 



600 A.D. 



Fig. 31. Evolution of the pillar with bulbous Capital 


3. The ‘Kudu’ 

We have already said that the Pallava kudu was charac- 
terized by the ‘ head of the shovel !. At other epochs the upper 
part of the kudu is always adorned with the head of a lion 
(simha-mukham). However, the leaves which adorn the 
circular part of the kudu differ in appearance at every epoch, 
in such a manner that it is often easy to know the age of an 
edifice by the appearance of the kUdu itself. 



44 


Figure 32 shows the successive aspects of the kudu at the 
different epochs in the history of South Indian architecture. 



Later ohola Paodya Vijayan&gar Modem 
Kg. 32. Evolution of the KSdu 


4. The Niche (‘ Goshta ’) 

The framing of niches where the images are placed differ 
according to their epochs. 

Figure 33 (a) above shows the upper part of a niche of one 
of the rathas of Mamallapuram. 



The Figure 33 ( b ) shows the ornamentation of a niche of 
the ‘ Early Chofa.’ 



u 




46 


This kind of ornamentation is perhaps generally nsed still 
in our days. It is distinguished from the other two by the 
presence of sala/i. We are able even to lay down the following 
principle : There.does not exist any niche decorated with a sdlai 
figure 33 (c) in the monuments prior to the eleventh century. 

This characteristic allows us to affirm that a monument 
of which the niches are surmounted by a Salai is posterior to 
the eleventh century. 

5. Ktjmbhapahjabam 

We hive already spoken of the ornament in studying 
modern architecture. 

We have represented it in Figure 7. 

The motif does not exist at all in the Pallava epoch. 

In order to ascertain the origin of the motif it is necessary 
to examine attentively figure 26 which represents the temple of 
' Siva at DadSpuram.’ 



Fig. 34. Kmabhapaujaram it Chidambaram, 3311th Mmury, Period 
Later Chola 



47 


One does not see a kumbhnpanjaratn but a kind of niche 
which occupies its place, the general appearance of which is 
almost the same. 

Figure 34. Later on (figure 34) the kumbJmpanjaram 
appears, but of a manner different from the modem form. 


6. The Pavilion 


The appearance of the pavilion allows ns less to charac- 
terize the age of edifices. Besides this part is very often re- 
stored, so that the upper part of the monuments is not always 
of the same style as its base. We have nevertheless attempted 
to show in figure 35 the appearance of pavilions in.-three different 
epochs. 



Fig. 35. E-rotation of the p»vilion 


We hope that we have made it clear, in the small space 
we allowed ourselves, that Dravidian Architecture is of indi- 
genous origin and has advanced by a course of evolution ; that 
the structural development is little if anything at all, while the 
development has all along been one of ornamentation. The 
motifs that are essential to- the study of this evolution have 
been described in this last chapter. It is to be hoped that the 
details given are adequate to- illustrate our position, and will 
evoke the interest that the book is intended to awaken. 


saisVBB- *!' THB HiP.-C.K, PRBSa, juimAa— 1911. 



